Grade
General Science
Student
Textbook
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Take Good Care of
This Textbook
1. Cover the book with protective materials, such as plastic , old
newspapers or magazine.
2. Always keep the book in a clean dry place.
3. Be sure your hands are clear when you use the book
4. Do not write on the cover or inside pages.
5. Use a piece of paper or cardboard as a bookmark.
6. Never tear or cut out any pictures or pages.
7. Repair any torn page with paste or tape.
8. Pack the book carefully when you place it in your school bag.
9. Handle the book with care when passing it to another person.
10. When using a new book for the first time, lay it on its back,
open a few page at a time. Press lightly along the bound edge
as you turn the pages. This will keep the cover in good
condition.
This textbook is the property of your school
take good care not to damage or lose it.
Here are 10 ideas to help take care of the book
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
General Science Student T extBook
Authors:
Goshu Asab (M.Sc.)
Michael Getachew (M.Sc.)
Andualem  Beka    (B.Sc.)
Editors and Evaluators:
Getahun Getachew (BEd)
Muluneh T/Birhan (BEd)
Ali Kemal (MEd)
Team Leader
Getachew Talema (MA)
TMS
General Science
Student
Textbook
General  Science Student  T extbook
Grade
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
General Science Student T extBook
General  Science Student  T extbook
Table of Contents                                                        page number
Unit 1: Basic Concepts of Science.......................................................... 1
1.1.The Nature of Science and its Branches................................................... 2
1.2. Common Laboratory Equipment, Uses, Safety Rules and
Procedures in Science Laboratories.........................................................12
Unit 2: Matter in Our Surrounding..................................................... 20
2.1.   Characteristics and Nature of Matter................................................... 21
2.2.   Physical and Chemical Properties of Matter ....................................... 32
2.3.   Classification of Substances.................................................................37
2.4.   Changes around us: Physical and Chemical Changes..........................47
2.5.   Separation of Mixtures and its Application..........................................52
Unit 3: Elements, Compound and Chemical Reaction..................................67
3.1.   Elements and their representation.........................................................68
3.2.   Compounds and their representation.....................................................71
3.3.   Simple chemical reactions and equations............................................. 80
3.4.  Uses Of Chemical Reactions in Every Day Situation........................... 88
Unit 4: Cell as the Basis of Life.......................................................................93
4.1.   Microscope...........................................................................................94
4.2.    Cell.....................................................................................................103
Unit 5: Living Things and Their Diversity....................................................121
5.1.  Living Things.......................................................................................122
5.2.  The kingdom of life..............................................................................131
Unit 6:  Earth in Space................................................................................... 154
6.1.  Shape and Dimensions of the Earth.....................................................156
6.2.  Parts of the Earth (Body and Atmosphere)..........................................164
6.3.  Earth’s movements...............................................................................171
6.4.  Earth System and Cycles.....................................................................176
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Unit 7: Motion, Force, Energy And Energy Resources..............................188
7.1.  Definition and Types of Motion............................................................190
7.2.  Definition of Force and Gravitational Force.........................................194
7.3.  Effects of Force.....................................................................................199
7.4.  Measuring Forces..................................................................................202
7.5.  Definition of Energy .............................................................................204
7.6.  Forms and Conversion of Energy..........................................................205
7.7.  Energy Sources......................................................................................208
7.8.  Wise use and Conservation of energy....................................................210
7.9. Resource Depletion and Environmental Degradation............................212
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
c 2021 by Addis Ababa Education Bureau
While every attempt has been made to trace and acknowledge
copyright, the authors and publishers apologies for any accidental
infringment where copyright has proved untraceable.
Unit 7: Motion, Force, Energy And Energy Resources..............................188
7.1.  Definition and Types of Motion............................................................190
7.2.  Definition of Force and Gravitational Force.........................................194
7.3.  Effects of Force.....................................................................................199
7.4.  Measuring Forces..................................................................................202
7.5.  Definition of Energy .............................................................................204
7.6.  Forms and Conversion of Energy..........................................................205
7.7.  Energy Sources......................................................................................208
7.8.  Wise use and Conservation of energy....................................................210
7.9. Resource Depletion and Environmental Degradation............................212
members  of the bureau: Ato Admasu Dechasa, Deputy Head of the Curriculum
Division, Ato Dagnew Gebru, Deputy Head of the Education Technology,  Ato
Samson Melese, deputy Head of Teacher Development Division, W/ro Abebech
Negash, Bureau Head Advisor, Ato Desta Mersha, Bureau Technical Advisor
and Ato Sisay Endale, Head of Education Bureau Office. Members of the AAEB
management, have to be commended for their painstaking efforts in addressing
instantly each issue of challenge, reviewing all drafts and providing immediate
feedbacks. Without their unreserved devotion, the timely and successful
realization of this huge work would not have been possible.
The Last deepest acknowledgement needs to go to the school principals for
allowing the textbook writers to be free of their regular job of teaching and to
focus on the material preparation. Moreover, their earnest and consistent moral
support deserves special words of praise.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Unit 1  BASIC CONCEPTS OF SCIENCE
At the end of this unit, you will be able to:
•  define science as a body of knowledge and the processes and
practices used to add to that body of knowledge;
•  describe the main branches of science and explain their relationship
•  relate how science and technology affect one‘s beliefs, practices
and ways of thinking;
•  appreciate the contributions of outstanding scientists to science
and technology;
•  discuss the importance of scientific values in decision making and
problem solving;
•  identify the significant contributions of Ethiopian Scientists in
science and technology;
•  identify different laboratory tools;
•  demonstrate safe ways of using apparatus in the laboratory;
•  practice precautionary measures in the laboratory;
•  exhibit knowledge of laboratory safety rules and procedures;
•  identify potential hazards and implement appropriate safety
when working in the laboratory. procedures
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
-  Science and technology
-  Scientists and ethical discipline
1.2. Common Laboratory Equipment, Uses, Safety Rules and
Procedures in Science Laboratories
-   Common Laboratory Apparatus
-   Laboratory Safety Rules
-   Science Laboratory safety symbol and hazard signs,
and meanings resources
-   Steps to write Laboratory report
By the end of this section you should be able to:
•  Define science;
•  Distinguish between the Indigenous Science and Conventional
Science;
•  Describe the main branches of science and explain their
relationship;
•  Relate how science and technology affect one‘s beliefs, practices,
and ways of thinking;
•  Appreciate the contributions of outstanding Ethiopian scientists to
science and technology;
•  Discuss the importance of ethical disciplines in scientific
investigations;
•  Solve the issue of environmental problems in their school
compound and its surroundings.
1.1  The Nature of Science and its Branches
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Introduction
The word science comes from the Latin word ‘Scientia’, which
means’ Knowledge’. But science is not just about having knowledge:
Science is a systematic method of gaining knowledge about the
physical and natural world and the social aspect of human society.
It provides an ordered way of learning about the nature of things,
based on observation and evidence. Science can be indigenous or
conventional.
Indigenous science is process by which indigenous people build their
empirical knowledge of their natural environment. It is knowledge
based on the social, physical and spiritual understandings.
Conventional science is the system of knowledge which relies on
certain laws that have been established through the application of the
scientific method to phenomena in the world around us.
In the lower grades, you have learnt about science in general. For
example, environmental science. In this and next grade you will learn
about general science which deals with things related to your day to
day life.
Form a group and discuss the following questions. Then share
your ideas to the classmates
i. Describe science by your own words
ii. Investigate the ways in which the major areas of science are
further divided. You can use  reference books and the internet
to augment your current ideas
iii. Differentiate Conventional Science and Indigenous Science
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Indigenous Science incorporating local people‘s knowledge and
indigenous perspectives, while conventional scientific approaches
are commonly recognized as Western science.
Why Do You Learn Indigenous Knowledge In Science?
There are two main reasons to include Indigenous Knowledge in the
science: firstly, to increase awareness of original culture and identity
and  secondly, to integrate indigenous knowledge with western science.
Ethiopia is one of the countries where a wide variety indigenous
knowledge practiced for a long time to solve practical problem that
exist in different areas like:
• extractions of medicinal chemicals from plants to treat disease and
fight infections. The common medicinal plants used for treating and
curing various disease are: Hagenia Abyssinica (Kosso tree) ,
Eucalyptus globulus (bahrzaf), and Ocimum lamiifolium Hochst
(Damakese)etc
• preserving meat by adding a salt and smoke drying.
1.1.2. Branches of Science
Perform the following activities.
Find some practical indigenous knowledge in your community that
solves community problems and present your finding to your class
Form a group and discuss the following questions. Then share your
ideas to the class
1.What are the major branches of science?
2. Give short descriptions of physics, Chemistry and  Biology.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Science has two major categories, which are natural science and
social science.
Natural science is the study of nature and natural laws. It includes
fields such as Chemistry, Biology and Physics.
Science
Natural
science
Social
Physics
Chemistry
Biology
Figure 1.1. Branches of  science
• Biology    is     a  branch  of    natural  science which studies    about
living things.
• Chemistry is a branch of natural science which deals with the
properties, composition, structure and transformation of substances.
• Physics is the branch of natural science. It is the study of the nature
of matter, energy and their interactions.
There is no clear boarder line between the different branches of
natural  sciences. Knowledge of natural sciences overlaps with each
other. For example, Chemistry and Physics knowledge are studied as
a subject called physical science/physical chemistry. It is the study of
properties of  materials and their interaction.
◊	 Biopysics: a  combination of Biology and Physics. It is the study
of physical phenomena and physical processes in living things, on
scales spanning molecules, cells, tissues and organisms.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure1.2.The relationships between some fields of Natural Science
l
◊	 Biochemistry: combination of biology and Chemistry. It is the
branch of science that explores the chemical processes within
and related to living organisms. It involves the study of chemical
reaction in living things.
Chemistry
Biology
Science
Physical Chemistry
Biophysics
Biochemistry
Physics
Natural
1.1.3. Science and Technology
You have already discussed what science is. Now, you will see what a
technology is.
Technology is the use of scientific knowledge to help human beings
work easier and live better as well as enjoy their environment more. It
includes the use of materials, tools, techniques, and sources of power
to make life easier, more pleasant and work more productive.
I.  Give short answer for the followings questions
1.  What is science?
2.  List the three branches of natural science
3.  Which field of science studies about matter and energy?
4.  What is the difference betwen biophysics and biochemistry?
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Things such as automobiles, TV sets, radio, bulb, microchip,
computer, airplane and home tools (appliances) are the products of
technology.
A person who studies technology is called a technologist.
Technologists apply Science and mathematical knowledge and skills
to produce a very useful tool.
Figure 1.3 Relationship of science and technology
Science and technology is integrally connected; but they are different
fields driven by different concepts and processes. Science generates
knowledge for its own sake, in order to propose and test explanations.
Technology, on the other hand, develops human-made solutions to
real-world problems. Of course, when science uses technology to
generate knowledge, technology uses scientific knowledge to generate
solutions.
Science is a systematic method of gaining knowledge about the
physical and natural world.
Technology is the use of scientific knowledge to help human
bings work easier and live better or putting scientific knowledge
intopractice.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Uses of Science and Technology for the Society
Science and technology plays an important role in our daily life.
They mainly concerned with the production of new materials of
desirable properties and qualities to satisfy social needs.They play an
important role in agriculture, in  production of medicines and drugs,
in environment and population control, in construction industry, in
manufacturing various products such as cosmetics, textiles, dyes,
soaps and detergents, plastics, rubber and a variety of metals, non-
metals, alcoholic beverages, dry cells and car batteries, etc.
1.1.4. Scientists and Ethical Discipline
Famous Scientists in the World and Ethiopia
A scientist is someone who systematically gathers and uses research
and evidence, to make hypothesis and test them, to gain and share
understanding and knowledge. Some of the world and Ethiopian
scientists and their contribution are listed below.
Marie Curie (1867-1934),
won the Nobel Prize for
the discovery of the
elements polonium
and radium
Isaac Newton (1643-1727)
discovered the laws of
motion and law of gravity.
Michael Faraday
(1791-1867),discovered
the generation of
electricity from
magnetism. He built the
1st dynamo.
Albert Einstein (1879-
1955) Developed special
relativity theory
Fig1.4 Some World known scientist and their works
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Prof.Yalemtsehay Mekonnen
was born in Asela, Ethiopia on
May 30, 1955. She work on
human physiology, the impact
of pesticides on human health,
the use of plants as medicinal
against human and animal
disease  and as the  first female
professor of Addis Ababa
university.
Activities 1.4
Form a group and do the following activity
Choose one of the scientists and create a role-play for the press
release following the news of his/her discovery.  Various roles to
consider would include: the scientist; media; fellow scientists; and
the general public. Alternatively, you could   choose an Ethiopian
scientist  and create a cartoon strip showing their discovery.
Dr.Aklilu
Lemma(1935-1997)
made his most
important scientific
discovery very early in
his career, in 1964, when
he discovered a
natural treatment to
schistosomiasis,also
known as snail
fever disease or bilharzia. He found that
berries from the endod plant, which is
commonly used to make soap and sham -
poos in many parts of Africa, is a potent,
inexpensive and safe molluscicide, to
prevent the spread of the parasitic worm.
This discovery made the plant an object of
scientific research in many parts of the world.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Dr. Tewolde Berhan Gebre Egziabher
is an Ethiopian scientist, who has
worked to ensure biodiversity and the
rights of communities to their genetic
resources.
Gebisa Ejeta (born 1950)
is an Ethiopian plant breeder,
geneticist and Professor at Purdue
University. In 2009, he won the
World Food Prize for his major
contributions in the production of
sorghum.
Form a group and discuss on the following questions then present
your  opinion to the class
i.   Do you think ethical discipline is important for science?
ii.  List down some ethical disciplines in science
Ethical Principle in Science
Ethics is an integral part of science. Like science, it requires to be
consistent and empirically justified in our interpretation the action
of scientists. Things are always get in front of us either right or
wrong, good or bad, but we have to decide that what we actually
want to do through our ethical point of view. The following lists
are some of ethical principles that various codes address in science:
Fig1.5 Some Ethiopian known scientist and their works
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
• Honesty
• Responsibility
• Objectivity
• Openness
• Competence
• Legality
• Non-Discrimination
• Carefulness.
Choose the best answers for the following questions.
1.   The natural science disciplines are
A.   interacting             C. interrelated
B.   overlapping           D. all of the above
2.   The branches of natural science studying the composition
of compounds and the processes taking place in organisms,
respectively, are:
A.   Chemistry and Biology          C.   Biology and Physics
B.   Physics and Geology              D.   Biology and Geology
3.  Which one of the following is true about Science?
A.  It is the study of physical and natural world.
B.  It comes from Latin word “Scientia  meaning ‘knowledge’
C.  It is the system of acquiring knowledge based on scientific
method.
D.  All are correct
4.  Which one of the following is true about Indigenous knowledge?
A.  It is based on scientific method.
B.  The knowledge derived from western countries.
C.  It incorporates local people’s knowledge.
D.  It has universal perspective and commonly recognized
as western science.
5.  Which one of the following is the World famous scientists who
discover law of motion and gravity?
A.  Michael Faraday          B.  Marie Curie
C.  Isaac Newton               D.  Albert Einstein
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
1.2   Common laboratory Equipment, Uses, Safety Rules and
Procedures in Science laboratories
1.2.1.   Common Laboratory Apparatus
Activities 1.6
Form a group and perform the following task. From locally
available materials produce laboratory tools such as beaker,
measuring cylinder, balance, tong, etc. and present its use to the
class.
At the end of this topic, students will be able to:-
• Identify different laboratory tools (such as Balance, Beaker;
Tongs, Bunsen burner, Test tubes, Petri dishes, etc.), and describe
their uses;
• Prepare some laboratory equipment/tools from locally available
materials;
• Demonstrate knowledge of lab safety rules and procedures;
• Practice precautionary measures in the laboratory;
• Identify potential hazards when working in the laboratory;
• Implement appropriate safety procedures when working in the
laboratory;
• Demonstrate the appropriate use of personal protective equipment
for a given laboratory activity.
Laboratory equipment comprises different sets of apparatus, which
are designed to perform various tasks in the laboratory by students,
teachers and scientists. The students can conduct laboratory work
smoothly and more efficiently only when they are familiar with the
apparatus commonly used in the laboratory. Some laboratory  apparatus
are shown in table 1 below.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Table	1	Different	laboratory	tools	and	their	use
Name                           Picture                Uses
Triple-beam                                                  Obtaining the mass of an
balance                                                          object
Beaker                                                          Holding water (also used to
heat liquid
Tongs                                                            Transporting a hot beaker;
and removing lid from crucible
Thermometer                                      Used to measure
temperature
Test tubes                                         Holds small amounts of liquids for
mixing or heating.
Petri dish                                         To grow and count bacteria
Graduated                                                          Marked with milliliter (ml)
cylinder                                                   scale and is used to measure volume
Bunsen burner                                         Heating (flame-safe) contents
in the lab
Laboratory equipment refers to the various tools and equipment
used by students, teachers and scientists working in a laboratory.
Laboratory report explains what you did in experiment, what you
learnt and what the result mean
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Prepare laboratory tools
Dear students, prepare some laboratory equipment’s or tools such as
beaker, measuring cylinder, balance, tongs, etc. from locally available
materials
1.2.2 Laboratory Safety Rules
Laboratory can be considered as a place of discovery and learning.
However, by the very nature of laboratory work, it can be a place
of danger if proper scientfic precautions are not taken. Follow the
followings laboratory safety rules precautions when you perform an
activity in laboratory.
•   Dress appropriately (goggles, gloves, shoes and
laboratory coats).
•   Tie back loose hair.
•   Know the locations of safety equipment like fire extinguisher.
•   Know what to do in case of an accident.
•   Do not taste or smell chemicals.
•   Do not eat or drink in laboratory.
•   Never add water to concentrated acid solutions. Always
add acid into water. Follow the Amharic AW! Not WA!
(A-acid, W-water)
•   Carry out only the experiments assigned by your teacher.
•   Dispose of all chemical wastes properly.
Activities 1.7
i.  List down some laboratory safety rules
ii. Discuss hazard symbols on chemical bottles,   electrical
gadgets and other materials found in the laboratory
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Depending upon the scientific investigation being conducted, a lab
can be filled with dangerous chemicals, Biological specimen, sharp
instrument, breakable objects. In order to safe workplace and avoid
accidents, lab safety symbols and signs need to be posted throughout
the workplace. The following laboratory safety symbols warn of
possible dangerous in laboratory user to help keep safe and informed.
Laboratory is a place where experiments in science is performed;
therefore, it helps students learn and develop their power of
observation, skill in handling apparatus varies kinds and independent
thinking.
Figure: 1. 6 A) hazard signs                       B) Laboratory safety symbols
Toxic materials Gloves
Face shield
Hand wash
Hearind protection
Fire extinguisher
Protective cloth
Saftety glasses
bootsCorrosives
Electrical hazard
Biological hazard
High voltage hazard
1.2.3 Science Laboratory Safety Symbols and Hazard  Signs,
Meanings
1.2.4 Writig a Laboratory Report
Health hazard
Chemical storage area
Flammable materrials
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
A laboratory report is a written composition of the results of an
experiment. It should be written precisely and clearly, using good
grammar and punctuation. Each report must include:  date , title,
objective, theory, materials or  equipment, chemical used, procedure,
observation, result, discussion, and conclusion.
Choose the best answers for the following questions
1.Which one of the following is NOT allowed in science laboratory?
A. Knowing the hazards of the materials being used
B. Reading the labels on the reagent bottle carefully
C. Wearing any type of cloth and shoes
D. Not using laboratory glassware for eating or drinking
purposes.
2. Which of the following laboratory tool is used for the approximate
measurements of volume of liquids
A. Test tube
B. Thermometer
C. Measuring Cylinder
D. Dropper
3. The type of laboratory equipment categorized under measuring
equipment is
A. Bunsen burner       B. Triple-beam balance
C. Tongs                    D. Stand and clamp
Key terms
Conventional Science
Ethics
Hazard Signs
Indigenous Science
Laboratory
Laboratory Equipment
Natural Science
Safety Rules
Science
Scientist
Technologist
Technology
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Unit Summary
Unit Summary
• Science is a systematic method of gaining knowledge about the
physical and natural world and the social aspect of human society.
• Indigenous science is process by which Indigenous people
build their empirical knowledge of their natural environment
• Conventional science is the system of knowledge which relies on
certain laws that have been established through the application of
the scientific method to phenomena in the world around us.
• Science has two major categories, which are natural science and
social science.
• Natural science has three branches which are Biology, chemistry
and physics.
• Technology is the use of scientific knowledge to help human beings
work easier and live better as well as enjoy their environment more.
• A person who studies technology is called a technologist.
• Science and technology plays an important role in our daily life
• Some famous scientists in Ethiopia are Dr. Aklilu Lemma, Engineer
Kitew Ejigu,Dr.Gebisa Ejeta, and Prof.Yalemtsehay Mekonnen
• Famous scientists from the world are Albert Einstein, Michael
Faraday. Marie Curie and Isaac Newton etc.
• Laboratory equipment comprises different sets of apparatus,
which are designed to perform various tasks in the laboratory.
• Knowing Laboratory safety rule is very important to reduce risks
faced during laboratory investigation.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Part I. Write ‘True’ for the correct statements and ‘False’ for
the wrong statements.
1. Natural science is the study of nature and natural laws.
2. Biology, Physics and chemistry do not share common areas
of study.
3. Technology makes life easier or more pleasant and work
more productive.
Part II: Choose the best answers for the following questions
1. The study of living things is the concern of
A. Chemistry            C.  Biology
B. Physics                D. Geology
2.______ is a branch of natural science which studies the
nature of matter, energy and their interaction.
A. Chemistry      C.  Biology
B. Physics           D. Geology
3. The famous Ethiopian scientist who discovered a natural
treatment to Schistosomiasis or bilharzia disease.
A.  Eng. Kitew Ejigu            C. Dr. Gebisa Ejeta
B.  Dr. Aklilu Lemma           D. Prof. Yalemtsehay Mekonen
4.  Which of the following is NOT a laboratory safety rule?
A. You should tie back loose hair.
B. You should add water to Acid.
C. Do not suck solution in the pipette by mouth.
D. When lighting a Bunsen burner, you should light the
match stick before turning on the gas.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
5._________is a branch of Knowledge and the systematic
study of universe and its all encompasses, one that based
upon facts, observation and experiments.
A. Theory      B. Natural law     C. Dogma        D. Science
Part III Match the items in column ‘A’ with items in column 'B'
A                                                                 B
1. Biochemistry                A. Combination of Biology and Physics
2. Physical Chemistry       B. Combination of Geology and Physics
3. Biophysics                    C. Combination of Biology and Chemistry
4. Geo-physics                  D. Combination of Chemistry and Physics
Part IV; Fill in the blanks with appropriate terms.
1._____________is the place where experiments in science is
performed.
2. A person who study about technology is called ____________.
3.Who is the famous Ethiopian scientist involved in development of
African commercial hybrid strains of sorghum_______.
Part V: Give short answer to the following questions.
1. Define technology
2. What is the difference between science and technology?
3. Mention the steps to write laboratory report.
4. Why ethics in science is important?
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Unit 2 MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDING
At the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• use particles  theory‘s  postulates to explain  properties and
behaviour of materials;
• classify matter as an element, compound, homogeneous
mixture, or heterogeneous mixture with regard to its physical
properties;
• describe the structure of solids, liquids and gases in terms of
particle separation, arrangement and types of motion.
• differentiate between physical and chemical properties and
changes of matter;
• appreciate that matter can be classified based on physical or
chemical properties;
• use properties of matter to identify substances and to separate
them;
• demonstrate scientific inquiry skills along this unit:
observing, classifying, comparing and contrasting, making
mode, inferring, communicating, asking questions, designing
experiments, drawing conclusions, applying concepts.
Learning Outcome
2.1. Characteristics and nature of matter
2.2. Physical and chemical properties of matter
2.3 Classification of substances (in terms of composition
and observable properties
2.4. Physical and chemical changes of substances
2.5 Separation of mixtures and its application
The object around us, called matter, exist in three physical forms or
states. These are solids, liquids and gases. For example, water can
exist as ice (solid), water (liquid) and steam (gas).The physical state
of a given sample of matter depend on temperature and pressure.
Energy must be added or removed to change one form or state of
substance into another.
The idea that matter is made up of tiny particles is called the Particulate
nature of matter.
Most of the changes that occur in our surrounding are either physical
or chemical. A physical change is a change in the form of matter but
not in its chemical identity. A chemical change, or chemical reaction,
is a change in which one or more kinds of matter are transformed into
a new kind of matter.
There are two principal ways of classifying matter: by its physical
state as a solid, liquid or gas and by its chemical constitution as pure
substance and mixture. Mixtures can be separated using a variety
of techniques. Some of the methods used to separate mixtures are
separation  by hand, sieving, filtration, evaporation, magnetic separation,
decantation and distillation.
2.1. Characteristics and Nature of Matter
After completing this section, you will be able to
• define matter with examples from day today life;
• demonstrate that matter is made up of tiny particles;
• state the postulates of the particle theory of matter;
• infer the particulate nature of matter from demonstration
/investigation;
• apply particle nature of matter in explaining diffusion and every day
effect of diffusion;
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Form a group and discuss the following questions and share your
ideas with the rest of the class.
1. Describe matter by your own words?
2. Consider the followings: air, light, soil, plant, water, sound,
table and heat.  Try to classify them as matter and non-matter.
What is matter? Matter is anything that has mass and occupies space.
The term mass refers to the amount of matter present in a sample.
Matter includes all things both living and nonliving that can be seen
(such as plants, water, soil, rocks, table and even this book), as well as
things that cannot be seen by our naked eye (such as air and bacteria).
Unlike matter, energy is known and recognized by its effect. It cannot
be seen, touched, smelt or weighed.
Therefore, various forms of energy such as heat, light, and sound are
not considered to be matter.
2.1.1. Meaning and Properties of Matter
•  describe and/or make a representation of the arrangement,
relative spacing, and relative motion of the particles in each of
the three states of matter;
•   describe and explain   compression   in terms of distance between
particles;
•  use the terms melting, evaporating, condensing, and freezing/
solidification to describe changes of state;
•  use the particulate nature of matter to explain: melting, freezing/
Solidification, Evaporation, Condensation.
1. Classify each of the following as matter or energy (non-matter).
a.  Air                                  e. Gold                           i. Silver
b. Pizza                                f. Virus                          j. Cake
c. Sound                              g.  heat                           k. Water
d. Light                               h. Bacteria                      l. Magnesium
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
2.1.2 Particulate Nature of Matter.
The particle model of matter states that all matter is made up of
tiny, moving particles with spaces between them. Matter is made of
particles too small to be seen that move freely around in space. The
inflation and shape of balloon indicates that it is filled with a small
particle of gas such as helium, hydrogen, nitrous oxide, oxygen, or
air. On other hand, from the effect of wind blowing leaves or dust, it
is possible to understand the particle matter is in continuous motion.
The idea that matter is made up of tiny particles is called the
Particulate nature of matter.
Form a group and perform the following activity. Then present your
finding to the class.
1. Inflate a balloon and observe its shape in the class room
2. Make observations while wind blowing leaves, or dust in
your surroundings. Based on the above activity, work on the
given question below
a.  What do you think that matter is made of?
b.  How do the particles move around in space
Perform the following activities
Fill in the blank by using the following words
{Increase, less, faster, cold, temperature, water, particles, mov-
ing, more, energy}
1. Everything is made of ____________.
2. Particles are always__________________.
3. An increase in ____________makes particles move
_________.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
2.1.3 Particle Theory of Matter (Particle Model of Matter)
Particulate nature of matter means that all matter is made up of
discrete tiny particles. Many years later, scientists came back to
Democritus’ idea and added to it. The theory they developed is called
the particle model of matter.
The followings are main ideas (postulate) in the particle model of
matter:
1.  All matter is made up of tiny particles.
2.  The particles of matter move continuously.
3.  The particles have spaces between them.
4.  Adding heat to matter makes the particles move faster.
5.  There are forces between the particles.
6.  Particles of one substance differ from the particles of other
substance.
I. Give short answers
1. List the postulates of particle theory.
2. Describe the particulate nature of matter.
4. An increase in____________ is the same thing as an _________
in energy.
5. The particles in hot water have _________energy than
_________water.
6. The particles in ice move ____________ than particles in
___________.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
2.1.4.	Diffusion
Experiment: 2.1
Title: simple experiment on diffusion
Objective: To discover what is meant by diffusion
Materials and Chemicals: Perfume, ink, beaker, pipette, Water
(H2O)
Procedure
1. Take a bottle of perfume and open it in one corner of the room
and record how long it takes to reach to different students at
different distances to smell it.
2.  Add 2 or 3 drop ink into a beaker of water using a pipette and
watch the ink diffuse to color the water.
3. Record your observation for the above to experment
Observation and analysis
Write your result/conclusion for the above experiments
The mixing and spreading out of a substance with another substance
due to the movement or motion of its particles is called diffusion. It
is also defined as the net movement of particles from an area of high
concentration to an area of low concentration.
Diffusion	in	gases is very fast. This is because the particles move
very quickly in all direction. Example: The smell of hot sizzling food
reaches us even when we are at considerable distance.
Diffusion	in	liquids is slower that in gas, because the particles in
liquids move slower as compared to particles in gases. Example: If a
drop of ink is put into a beaker of water, then the color of ink spreads
into the whole water of the beaker.
Diffusion	in	solids	is very very slow process because the particles
of solids are highly restricted to motion.
Diffusion	in	Daily	Life
Diffusion is everywhere around us in our everyday life. The followings
are some common effect of diffusion in day to day activities.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Tea: A tea bag placed in a cup of hot water will diffuse into the water.
Perfume: When perfume is produced in one part of a room, it spreads
to the rest through diffusion. There are fewer of the scent-producing
chemicals in the further parts of the room, so the molecules naturally
spread out.
Food Coloring: A drop of food coloring in a glass of water colors
the water through diffusion. The dye molecules slowly spread evenly
through the liquid, creating one particular shade.
Soda: Leave a soda bottle open and the carbon dioxide bubble will
diffuse and leave it flat. Air has a lower concentration of that bubbly
carbon dioxide than the drink does, so the CO 2 molecules depart the
beverage and spread into the air.
1. Complete the blank space from the word box
You can smell deodorant like axe in the classroom after someone
sprays it in the  hallway because the _____moves from_____
concentration in the hallway to___ concentration in the
classroom. This is an example of______
2. Arrange in an increasing order of the rate of diffusion of solids,
liquids and gases.
2.1.5  Properties of Solids, Liquids and Gases
Copy the table in your exercise book and complete it using
objects around you. Discuss your reasons for each decision with
your group.
Substance         solids, liquids and         I know this is be
gases                              cause….
Water                    liquid                            I can pour it.
Diffusion low scent high
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
According to Kinetic (particle) theory, all matter is composed of tiny
particles (atoms, molecule, and ions).These particles are arranged
differently in solids, liquids and gases.
Solids
In solids, the particles are arranged in fixed pattern. The particles
held together strongly and are tightly packed. Particles in solid can
vibrate, but, they stay in the same  place.  Solids have definite shape
and definite volume. Examples of Solids are Stones, wood, metals etc.
Liquids
The particles in a liquid are separated by spaces that are large enough
to allow the particles to slide past each other. It takes the shape of its
container because the particles can move around more freely than they can
in a solid. At room temperature water, ethanol, benzene, oil are liquids.
Figure 2.2: pattern of liquids
Figure 2.1: pattern of Solids
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Gases
The particles in a gas are separated by much larger spaces than the
particles in a liquid or a solid. Therefore, a gas is mostly empty
space. For example, air, hydrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide and
nitrogen are gases.
Figure 2.3: pattern of gas
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
particles between particles
Motion of
particles
-flow(move) freely
-flow together in
random motion
-are known as fluids
flow together in
random motion
-are known as fluids
-Do not flow or move
-Vibrate in a fixed
position
compressibility Highly and easily
compressible
Compressible to a
very small extent
Not compressible
Volume and shape -Have no definite
Shape and volume
-Assume the shape of
the container and
entirely fill it.
-Have no definite
Shape
-Assume the shape
of the container
-Have definite
Shape and volume
Density Have very low density
than liquids and solids
-Have low density
than solids
-Condensed state
compared to gases
-Denser than all
-Condensed state than
all
Pressure Exert pressure equally
in all direction
Exert pressure
towards depth.
Exert pressure towards
gravity
Diffusion  Diffuse spontaneously
in all directions with
random motion
Diffuse very slowly
in random motion
Difficult to diffuse
Diagram
I. Give short answers
1. What is the three state of matter?
particles can move around more freely than they can in a solid. At room
temperature water, ethanol, benzene, oil are liquids.
Pattern of liquids                                      Microscopic view of liquids
Figure 2.2: pattern and microscopic view of liquids
Gases
The particles in a gas are separated by much larger spaces than the particles in a
liquid or a solid. Therefore, a gas is mostly empty space.  For example, air,
hydrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide and nitrogen are gases
Pattern of gas                                                Microscopic view of gases
Figure 2.3 pattern and microscopic view of gases
Table Properties of solids, liquids and gases
Properties Physical states
Gases Liquids Solids
Arrangement of
particles
-disorderly arranged
-particles are very far
apart
-almost no attractive
force between
•Less orderly
-Arranged particles
are relatively clos e
to each other
-Have relative
attractive force
•Orderly
arranged(regular
pattern)
•Particles are very
close to each other
Table 2.1 Properties of solids, liquids and gases
a
- have definite volume
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Copy the flow chart. The arrows represent the process involved
when matter change state.
Write the name for each process on the arrow to your flow chart.
Solid                        Liquid                     Gas
Solid                        Liquid                     Gas
A B
CD
2.1.6. Changes in State
I. Give short answers
1. What are the three states of matter?
2. List the properties of solids
3. Name a property of liquids that do not share with solids
4. Name a property of gas that do not share with liquids
5. Give a characteristic that is the same for liquids and solids
6. Give a characteristic that is the same for gases and liquids
7. Which state of matter can not be poured?
8. Which state of matter can be compressed easily?
II. Choose the correct answer for the following questions.
1. Which state of matter is fluid?
A. solid   B.  Liquid   C. Gas   D.   B and C
2. In which state of matter are particles close together?
A. solid   B.  Liquid   C. Gas   D.all
A change of state is the change of a substance from one physical
form of matter to another. A change in physical state is the most
common type of physical change. Melting, freezing, evaporation,
and condensation are all changes of state.  The three states of matter can
be interconverted without changing the composition of the substance.
To change a substance from one state to another, energy must be
added or removed.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
How do solids and liquids change state?
When a solid is warmed, its particles gain energy and speed up, and
the attraction between them decreases. Eventually they slide past one
another. The process in which a solid substance changes into a liquid
on heating is called melting (fusion).
The process of changing a liquid into a solid is called freezing
(solidification).  When a liquid is cooled, its particles have less energy,
become slow down, and lock into the fixed arrangement of a solid.
The temperature at which a liquid substance changes into a solid is
the liquid’s freezing point.
How do liquids and gases change state?
As a liquid is warmed, its particles gain energy.  Some particles gain
enough energy that they escape from the surface of the liquid and
become a gas. The change from a liquid to a gas is called evaporation.
The temperature at which a liquid substance changes into a gas is the
liquid’s boiling point.
As a gas is cooled, its particles lose energy. The attraction between
particles overcomes the speed of their motion, and a liquid forms. The
change of state from a gas to a liquid is called condensation.
How do solids and gases change state?
Some solids and gases can change state without ever becoming a
liquid. The change from a solid state directly into a gas is called
sublimation.
Some common substance undergo sublimation are: Iodine, ammonium
chloride and solid carbon dioxide (dry ice).
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Deposition is the change in state from a gas directly to a solid.
After completing this section, you will be able to
•  describe physical Properties;
•  use physical properties of matter to identify substances;
•  conduct experiments to identify properties of substances
and make group report;
•  identify chemical properties;
•  distinguish between physical and chemical properties.
2.2.  Physical and Chemical Properties of Matter
Figure 2.4: Interconversion process of the three state
2.1.4  Physical properties of matter
Perform the following tasks in groups and present your conclusions
to the class. Given the following physical properties of substances:
odor, color, taste, melting point, boiling point and density.
1  Which of these physical properties have constant values under
specific condition, such as temperature?
2  Which physical properties can be recognized directly by our
sense organs?
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
3 Which of these properties are measured using instruments?
4 What will happen to ice kept in a cup in the classroom?
5. Which sense organs help us to detect color, odor and taste?
6. How do you describe the taste of lemon?
Substances are identified by their properties as well as by their
composition. A physical property can be measured and observed
without changing the composition or identity of a substance. For
example, we can measure the melting point of ice by heating a block
of ice and recording the temperature at which the ice is converted
to water. Water differs from ice only in appearance and not in
composition, so this is a physical change; we can freeze the water to
recover the original ice. Therefore, the melting point of a substance
is a physical property. Other examples of physical property is gold is
a shiny yellow metal, lead has a high density. Observations of these
characteristics do not change the composition.
There are two kinds of physical properties, namely, extensive and
intensive physical properties.
Extensive physical properties  are the properties, which depend
on the amount or quantity of sample and they vary from sample to
sample. Examples: length, diameter, mass, and volume
Intensive physical properties are properties which do not depend on
the amount of a substance present. Examples: density, color, melting
point, and hardness.
Intensive properties are useful in distinguishing between different
substances because they do not vary from sample to sample.
Some Physical Properties of Substances are Listed Below
1. Physical Properties Detected by Sense Organs
Color: The color of a substance results from its interaction with light.
Substances can be identified by their colors. For example, chalk is
white, water is colorless, and gold is yellow and so on.
Odor: refers to the property of a substance perceived by the sense of
smell. Terms commonly used to describe the odor of a substance are
pungent, fragrant, spicy, fruity and odorless. For example water is
odorless, flowers are fragrant, and orange smells fruity.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Taste: refers to physical properties that can be perceived by
the taste buds of the tongue. The taste of a substance is usually
described by terms like sweet, bitter, sour, salty, and tasteless.
For example honey is sweet, lemon is sour and table salt is salty.
You are allowed to taste some acids in the forms of citric acid that
are found in lemon and orange or acetic acid in the form of vinegar
at home but you have never been allowed to taste any kind of acids
in the laboratory. What is the reason?
Discuss your finding in group and present to the class.
Caution!
Caution!
Care has to be taken in smelling substance as they
may be harmful
Tasting can be used to identify substances only if the
substance to be tasted is not harmful.
2.Physical State: Physical state is the form in which a substance is
found under a given conditions such as temperature and pressure. The
three physical states of matter are solid, liquid and gas. The same
substance may exist in different states at different conditions. For
example, water exists in three physical state form as a solid below 0 ºC,
as a liquid between 0 oC and 100 oC, and as a vapor or gas above 100 oC.
3. Measurable Physical Properties
Measurable physical properties are the properties of a substance that
can be measured using an appropriate apparatus. These physical
properties have constant values under specific conditions like
melting point, boiling point, density and electrical conductivity.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Melting Point: is the temperature at which a solid substance changes
to its liquid state. For example, ice is the solid form of water. Ice melts
to liquid (water) at 0°C. Therefore, the melting point of ice is 0°C.
Boiling Point: is the temperature at which the vapor pressure of the
liquid equals the surrounding atmospheric pressure. At sea level water
boils at 100°C.
Density: is defined as the mass per unit volume of a substance. It is
expressed mathematically as:
Mass of substance                m
Density =                                   or d =
V olume of substance           V
Units of density are kilogram per cubic meter (kg/m3).
Electrical Conductivity: Electrical conductivity is the ability of a
substance to conduct electricity. This is a physical property mostly
characteristic of metallic substances such as copper, aluminum, iron,
silver and zinc.
2.1.5 Chemical Properties of Matter
A chemical property is a characteristic of a substance that describes
the way the substance undergoes or resists change to form a new
substance. Chemical properties cannot be determined just by viewing
or touching the substance; therefore, the substance’s internal structure
must be affected for its chemical properties to be investigated.
Flammability is one example of a chemical property. Reactivity
between two substances is also another chemical property of matter.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
properties cannot be determined just by viewing or touching the sub stance; the
substance‘s internal structure must be affected for its chemical properties to be
investigated.
Flammability is one  example of a  chemical property . Reactivity between two
substances is another chemical property of matter.
Table 2.2: Comparison between Physical and chemical properties.
Physical properties Chemical properties
Properties can be measured or observed
without changing the chemical nature
of the substance.
Properties that describe how a
substance changes (or resists change)
to form a new substance.
Easily identified. Cannot be determined just by viewing
or touching the substance.
The composition or identity of a
substance not change.
The substance‘s internal structure must
be affected for its chemical properties
to be investigated.
Examples: color, density, volume,
melting. boiling. Conductivity.
Examples :Flammability and reactivity
1.  Classify each of the following properties as a physical property or a
chemical property.
a. Iron metal rusts in an atmosphere of moist air.
b. Mercury metal is a liquid at room temperature.
c. Nickel metal dissolves in acid to produce a light green solution.
d. Potassium metal has a melting point of 63°C.
e.  Copper metal possesses a reddish brown color.
f. Titanium metal can be drawn into thin wires.
1. Classify each of the following properties as a physical property or
a chemical property.
a. Iron metal rusts in an atmosphere of moist air.
b. Mercury metal is a liquid at room temperature.
c. Nickel metal dissolves in acid to produce a light green solution.
d. Potassium metal has a melting point of 63°C.
e.  Copper metal possesses a reddish brown color.
f. Titanium metal can be drawn into thin wires.
g. Beryllium metal, when inhaled in a finely divided form, can
produce serious lung disease.
h. Silver metal shows no sign of reaction when placed in
hydrochloric acid.
i. Lead is denser than aluminum.
j. Flammability of plastics.
2. Classify each of the following properties as an intensive property
or extensive property.
a. boiling point      b. length     c. mass     d. Color     e. density
f. volume               g. melting point
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Perform the following tasks in groups and present your findings to
the rest of the class.
1 Conseder the following substances: chalk, bronze, sugar
solution, iron, water, milk, oxygen, copper, gold, sugar, table salt,
cooking oil, sulfur, air, silver, hydrogen, ink, chlorine and soil.
Classify each of them under pure substance or mixture.
Among pure substances, state whether it is an element or a
compound
3.  Categorize the following physical properties as physical
properties recognized by our sense organs or measurable
physical properties
a. Density     b. odor    c. taste     d. melting point
e. color          f. conductivity
2.3	Classification	of	Substances
After completing this section, you will be able to
•  use the particle theory to describe the difference between pure
substances and mixtures;
•  differentiate between elements and compounds;
•  classify common elements into metals and non-metals;
•  investigate the properties of metals and non-metals and compile
a list of general properties;
•  investigate the properties of non-metals and compile a list of
general properties;
•  describe and classify mixtures as homogeneous and heterogeneous.
•  use models/ particles diagrams to show differences between
homogenous and heterogeneous;
•   describe the relationship among elements, compounds, mixtures,
homogenous mixture and heterogeneous mixtures.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
MATTER
PURE SUBSTANCE MIXTURE
Anything that has mass
and occupies space
Only one substance
present
Physical combination of
two or more substances
In addition to its classification by physical state, matter can also be
classified in terms of its chemical composition into two broad
categories:  pure substances and mixtures.
Figure 2.5 Matter falls into two basic classes: pure substances and mixtures.
2.3.1. A Pure Substance
A pure substance is a single kind of matter that cannot be separated
into other kinds of matter by any physical means. All samples of a
pure substance contain only that substance and nothing else. Pure
water is water and nothing else. A pure substance always has a
definite and constant composition. Some other common examples of
pure substances are oxygen, sulfur, copper, silver, gold, sugar, table
salt, water and carbon dioxide. Pure substances are classified as
elements and compounds.
Figure 2.6 a pure substance can be either an element or a compound.
PURE SUBSTANCE
COMPOUND ELEMENT
Only one substance
present
Cannot be broken down
into simpler substances by
chemical or physics means
Can be broken down into
constiiuent elements by
chemical,but not physical
means
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure 2.7:  Image of copper, silver & gold
Non-metals: non-metal is a chemical element that does not have
metallic properties and they are few in number as compared to
metals. Carbon, oxygen, sulfur, fluorine and phosphorous are some
common examples of nonmetals.
2.3.2 Elements and compounds
2.3.2 Elements and compounds
Elements: an element is a pure substance that cannot be broken down
into simpler substances by ordinary chemical means. It is composed
of only one kind of particle (atoms), which is the smallest particle
of an element. At present, 118 elements are known. Among these
elements, 92 of them occur naturally on earth while the rest are man-
made or artificial elements. Elements might be divided into metals
and non-metals.
Metals: Many chemical elements are referred to as metals. Some
examples of metals are gold, iron, silver, copper, aluminum, sodium
and lead.
Metals are characterized by the following physical properties
• They are shiny (lustrous) in nature.
• They are good conductor of heat and electricity .
• Their density and melting point is high.
• Moldable (Malleable): malleability is the ability of a
substance to be pressed into sheets when hammered.
• Ductile: ductility is the ability to be drawn into thin wire.
• Are solid at room temperature except mercury which is found
in liquid state.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Perform the following activity in groups.
Which non-metal is essential for our life?
Non metals are characterized by the following physical properties:
• they exist in two of the three states of matter at room temperature
except bromine which exists as a liquid state.
• they are not shiny (dull appearance), and are non-conductors of
heat and electricity
• they have relatively, low melting points and boiling points.
Figure 2.8: Images of carbon and sulfur
Metals                                         Non-metals
These are solids at room temperature  These exist in all three states
except mercury
These are very hard except sodium
and potassium                                      These are soft except diamond
These are malleable and ductile          These are brittle and can break
down into pieces
These are shiny                               These are non-lustrous except
iodine
Electropositive in nature                     Electronegative in nature
Have high densities.                     Have low density
Table 2.3 Comparison between metals and non-metals.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Experiment 2.2
Title: Distinguishing compounds and mixtures.
Objective: To investigate the difference between a compound and a
mixture.
Materials Required: Small bar magnet, iron filings, powdered
sulfur, test tube, Bunsen burner, magnifying glass, test tube tong, sand,
beam balance, watch glass and test tube made from soda glass tube.
Procedure
Part I
1. Prepare a mixture containing iron powder and sulfur powder in the
ratio 7:4 by mass. Do this by weighing out 7 g of iron powder and
4 g of finely powdered sulfur onto separate pieces of filter paper (or
use weighing boats).
2. Mix the two powders by pouring repeatedly from one piece of
paper to the other until a homogeneous mixture (by appearance) is
obtained.
Compounds
A compound is a pure substance that is made up of more than one type
of atom bonded together. A compound can be broken into two or more
elements by a chemical means. For example, Water is a compound.
By means of an electric current, water can be broken down into the
gases hydrogen and oxygen, both of which are elements. The ultimate
breakdown products for any compound are elements. Elements can
combine with other elements to form compounds. Sodium chloride
is formed by the combination of sodium and chlorine elements.
Such types of compounds that are formed by the combination of two
different elements are called binary compounds.
What distinguishes an element from a compound?
A compound’s properties are always different from those of its
component elements, because the elements are chemically rather than
physically combined in the compound.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Note the appearance of the pure elements and the mixture.
3. Demonstrate that iron can be separated from the mixture by
physical means. Do this by bringing one end of a magnet close to the
mixture as shown in figure 2.9
Figure 2.9 Separating iron from a mixture of iron and sulfur
Questions: i .What did you observe as you bring the magnet close
to the mixture?
ii. What did you observe under the magnifying glass?
Part II    1. Place about 2 g of the mixture into a soda glass tube
2. Insert a plug of mineral wool (mineral fiber) into the
mouth of the test tube. Clamp the test tube as shown
in the diagram
3.Heat the powder mixture at the base of the test tube
gently at first and then more strongly (use a blue flame
throughout). Heat until an orange glow is seen inside
the test tube. Immediately stop heating. Let the students
see that the glow continues and moves steadily through
the mixture.
4. Allow the test tube to cool down.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
2.3.3. Mixtures
5. Once cool, it is possible to break open the test tube to
show the appearance of the product, iron (II) sulfide.
The test tube can be broken open using a pestle and
mortar. It is advisable to wear protective gloves.
6. Take the product formed and powder it. Examine the
product under a magnifying glass. Bring a magnet
over it.
Activities 2.10
Discuss the following ideas in groups and present your opinion to
the rest of the class.
1.  Suppose a teaspoon of magnesium filings and a teaspoon of
powdered sulfur are placed together in a metal beaker. Would
this constitute a mixture or a pure substance? Suppose the
magnesium filings and sulfur are heated so they react with
each other, forming magnesium sulfide. Would this still be a
“mixture”? Why or why not?
2.  What is the difference between pure water and a solution of
sodium chloride in water?
3.  Do you think air is a pure substance or a mixture?  Why?
figure 2.10 The reaction between iron and sulfur
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
A mixture is a physical combination of two or more pure substanc -
es in which each substance retains its own properties. Components
of a mixture retain their identity because they are physically mixed
rather than chemically combined. Consider a mixture of small rock salt
crystals and ordinary sand. Mixing these two substances changes
neither the salt nor the sand in any way. Common mixtures include:
Soil- a mixture of different sized particles and plant material.
Cooking oil – a mixture of vegetable oils.
Ink- contains a mixture of dyes, dissolved in alcohol and water.
Milk- contains proteins, carbohydrates, fats, water, minerals.
Air- contain oxygen, nitrogen , carbon dioxide.
Mixtures are sub classified as heterogeneous and homogeneous.
Homogeneous Mixture
Perform the following tasks in groups and present your findings to
the rest of the class.
The following substances are given: air, milk, soil, salt solution,
brass, chalk, water, cooking oil, gold, silver, sugar solution, Pepsi.
Identify which of them are homogeneous mixtures.
Homogenous mixtures are a combination of two or more
substances that has the same composition throughout and has no
visible boundary. A homogeneous mixture also called solution.
For example, a mixture of table salt and water (salt solution) is a
homogeneous mixture because all the parts of the solution have the
same salt-water composition. Homogeneous mixtures (solutions)
may exist in one of the three states i.e. solid, liquids and gas.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
mixture also called solution. For example, a mixture of table salt and water (salt
solution) is a homogeneous mixture because all the parts of the solution have the
same salt-water composition. Homogeneous mixture (solution) may exist in one of
the three states i.e. solid, liquids and gas.
Table 2.4: state and type of homogeneous mixture (solution)
Type of homogeneous
mixture(solution)
Common examples
Gaseous Gas in gas Air, mixture of oxygen and nitrogen
Liquids Gas in liquid Soft drinks(Pepsi, Miranda, coca
cola),beer
Liquid in liquid Alcohol in water
Solid in liquid Salt solution, sugar solution
Solids Solid in a solid brass (Zn/Cu), Bronze (cu/Sn)
Figure 2.11: Some common examples of homogeneous mixture
SteelVinegar Sugar solution
Figure 2.11 Some common examples of homogeneous mixture
Heterogeneous Mixtures
Perform the following tasks in groups and present your findings to
the rest of the class.
Consider the following substances: ethanol alcohol, bronze, sugar
solution, iron, water, milk, oxygen, copper, gold, sugar, table salt,
cooking oil, sulfur, air, silver, charcoal, ink, chlorine and soil.
Then identify among the list of substances which are
heterogeneous mixture
Type of homogeneous
mixture(solution)
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure 2.12:some common examples of heterogeneous mixtures
Table 2.5: Differences between homogenous and heterogeneous mixtures.
Homogeneous mixture  Heterogeneous mixture
It has a uniform composition It has a non-uniform composition
It has only one phase There are two or more phase
The constituent cannot be seen easily. The constituent can be seen easily
‗Homo‘ means the same ‗Hetero‘ means different
E.g. sugar solution, soft drinks, salt
solution,
Milk, soil. sand and water, oil and
water
1. Classify each of the following as a mixture or a pure substance.
a. Water b. uranium c. blood    d .alcohol  e. the oceans  f. iron g. table salt
h. brass i. hydrogen  j gold, k  sugar.  L. milk   M. honey N. benzene
Of the pure substances, which are elements and which are compounds?
2. Define and give four examples illustrating each of the following terms.
a. element   b. compound     C. homogeneous mixture d. heterogeneous mixture
II. Choose the best answers for the following questions
1. Which of the following is metallic liquid element at room temperature
A. bromine   B. mercury   c. sodium    D. iron
2. Substance y is hard, lustrous solid which readily conduct heat and electricity. Y
is likely to be:
A. Salt.   B. metalloid    C. Metal   D. non metal
3. Which of the following substance make a homogeneous mixture with water
A. benzene    B. oil    C. sugar   D. sulfur
4. Which substance is not a mixture?
Soil
Figure 2.12 Some common examples of heterogeneous mixtures
Heterogeneous mixtures are a combination of two or more substances
that has no uniform composition throughout and contains one or
more visible boundaries between the components. The components
of a heterogeneous mixture can be identified by our naked eyes or
with the help of a microscope or a magnifying glass. For example,
a mixture of sulfur and iron filings is a heterogeneous mixture. This
is because the sulfur and iron particles remain visible and physically
separated. Other Examples of heterogeneous mixture are blood, milk,
mixture of sand and water, river water, muddy water, benzene and
water, oil and water, dusty air, soil etc.
Blood
Soup
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
A. air        B. sea water      C. pure water       D. brass
2.4. Changes around Us: Physical and Chemical Changes
After completing this section, you will be able to
 Describe physical and chemical change
  Distinguish the physical and chemical changes using their characteristic
 Conduct some s imple activities to show physical and chemical changes and
write group report.
  Observe and describe physical chemical changes that are important in everyday life.
  Identify useful and harmful physical and chemical changes.
The followings are day to day activities in your home. Copy and complete the
table, by identifying which activities represent ―physical change‖ and which one
represent ―Chemical change" by giving reasons for your choice
Name of activities Physical
changes
Chemical
changes
Reasons
Burning of charcoal
Melts of ice
Dissolving sugar in
water
Fermentation
Rusting of nail
Evaporation of water
Spoilage of food
Burning candle
2.4. Change around Us: Physical and Chemical Changes
I Answer the following questions correctly
1. Classify each of the following as a mixture or a pure substance.
a.Water    b. uranium     c. blood       d .alcohol      e. the oceans
f. iron      g. table salt     h. brass       i. hydrogen    j. gold
k. sugar.   l. milk             m. honey    n. benzene
Of the pure substances, which are elements and which are
compounds?
2. Define and give four examples illustrating each of the following
terms.
a. element   b. compound     c. homogeneous mixture
d. heterogeneous mixture
II. Choose the best answers for the following questions
1. Which of the following is metallic liquid element at room
temperature?
A. bromine   B. mercury   C. sodium    D. iron
2. Substance ‘Y’ is hard, lustrous solid which readily conduct heat
and electricity. ‘Y’ is likely to be:
A. Salt.   B. Metalloid    C. Metal   D. Non-metal
3. Which of the following substance make a homogeneous mixture
with water?
A. benzene    B. oil    C. sugar   D. sulfur
4. Which of the following substances is not a mixture?
A. air     B. Sea water    C. Pure water     D. Brass
After completing this section, you will be able to
• describe physical and chemical change;
• distinguish the physical and chemical changes using their
characteristic;
• conduct some simple activities to show physical and chemical
changes and write group report;
• observe and describe physical and chemical changes that are
important in everyday life;
• identify useful and harmful physical and chemical changes.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
The followings are day to day activities in your home. Copy
and complete the table, by identifying which activities represent
“physical change” and which one represent “Chemical change" by
giving reasons for your choice
Name of activities Physical changes Chemical          Reasons
changes
Burning of charcoal
Melts of ice
Dissolving sugar in
water
Fermentation
Rusting of nail
Evaporation of water
Spoilage of food
Burning candle
Change is happening around us all the time. Changes are classified
as either physical or chemical changes.
2.4.1. Physical Change
A physical change is a process in which a substance changes its
physical appearance but not its chemical composition. A new
substance is never formed as a result of a physical change.
Figure 2.13 melting of ice
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Experiment 2.3
Title: Rusting of iron.
Objective: To investigate the type of change that occurs during
rusting of iron
Materials and Chemicals: test tube rack, iron nail, test
Procedure:
1. Put a few lean shiny iron nails into a test tube containing some
fresh tap water.  The water contains dissolved air.
2. Set the test tube in a rack. After a few days observe the change
that has taken place.
Figure: 2.15 rusting of iron
Melting of ice, Grinding salt, tearing paper into small pieces, Making
an iron bar magnetic, evaporation of water, dissolving sugar in water
and breaking a stick are common examples of physical changes.
2.4.2. Chemical Change
A chemical change is a process in which a substance undergoes a
change in chemical composition. Some examples of chemical changes
are: Iron nail going rusty, heating magnesium ribbon, burning candle.
photosynthesis,fermentation,etc
Figure 2.14 burning of candle
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Observation and analysis
1. What color do you observe on the iron nail?
2. Is the change physical or chemical? Why?
2.4.3 Characterstics of physical and chemical changes
Discuss the following ideas in groups and present your opinion to
the rest of the class
1. List the characteristics of physical and chemical changes you know
2. Compare and contrast the characteristics of physical and chemical
changes
Characteristics of Physical Change
• No new substance is formed.
• The composition of substance is not altered.
• It is easily reversed by physical means.
• Energy changes are not necessarily.
• It is a change in physical property.
Characteristics of Chemical change
• New substances with new properties are formed
• The composition of substance  altered
• It is accompanied by Energy changes
• The change is not easily reversed
• It is a change in chemical property
2.4.4 Useful and Harmful physical and Chemical Changes
Perform the following tasks in groups and present your findings to the
rest of the class.
List the important and harmful physical and chemical changes that
encounter in our life.
a. Important physical changes
b. Important chemical changes
c. Harmful physical changes
d. Harmful chemical changes
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Useful	effect	of	Physical	changes
Physical changes are useful in the following ways:
• Evaporation and condensation create water cycle
• Freezing preserves food, medicine, and other materials
• Melting, cutting, bending and mould different tools and accessories
• To get substances in the form, shape or size we want
• To mix two or more substances together
• To separate substances from their mixtures
Harmful	effect	of	Physical	changes
Even many physical changes are useful, it may also be harmful in
several way: like cutting tree, bad weather condition, oil spills, etc.
Useful	effect	of	chemical	changes
Chemical Changes are useful in the following ways:
-Photosynthesis: chemical changes which occur in plants
(photosynthesis) produce substances which enable plants to grow We
depend on plants for our food. The change which occur in the food
we consume are chemical changes.
-Energy production: Most of the energy used nowadays, with the
exception of wind, water and nuclear energy, is chemical energy. This
energy released as heat or electricity when certain chemical change
takes place.
Food and medicine production, food digestion, fermentation, food
cooking, etc. are also some important chemical change in our life to
produce new substance.
Harmful	effect	of	Chemical	changes
In contrast to its usefulness, some chemical change has negative
impact. For example rusting (rusting of cars, bridges, and ships),
souring food, burning of fuel, smoke emission, plastic disposal,
dumping of chemicals, etc. are harmful chemical changes in our life.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Exercise2.7
I Answer the following questions correctly
1.Classify the following as physical changes or chemical changes.
a.  the cutting of wood
b.  interaction of food with saliva and digestive enzymes
c.  The vigorous reaction of potassium metal with water to
produce hydrogen gas and potassium hydroxide.
d.  Straightening a bent piece of iron with a hammer.
e.  The ignition and burning of a match.
f.   photosynthesis
g.  boiling of an egg.
h.  boiling of water
i.  dissolution of salt
II. Choose the best answers for the following questions
1. Change in size, shape and state of a substance is a____
A. chemical change       B. physical change
C. cyclic change            D. none
2. Which of the following statements is correct?
A. Evaporation is a chemical change
B. Digestion of food is a chemical change
C. Burning of paper is physical change
D. all
3. Among the following which one is a physical change?
A. Burning of candle                         B. Fermentation
C. Making an iron bar magnetic        D. all
2.5. Separation of Mixtures and its Application
After completing this section, you will be able to
• list methods of separation of mixtures;
• give some specific examples of mixtures that can be
eparated by filtration, decantation, simple distillation,
magnetic separation and using separator funnel;
• name apparatuses used in decantation, filtration, simple;
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
2.5.1. Separation Techniques of Mixture
Discuss the following questions in groups and present your
conclusion to the class
1. Write the common separation methods  you know for the
following common mixtures from your daily life experiences
A.   A mixture of Teff and peas
B.   A mixture of iron filings and sulfur powder
C.   A mixture of chalk particles in water
D.   A mixture of cooking oil and water
E.   Salt solution
F.    A mixture of alcohol and water
G.   A mixture of salt and sand
H.   A mixture of orange, banana and mango
•  assemble apparatuses used in decantation, filtration, simple
distillation, separator funnel;
•  conduct and report on an investigation that uses physical
means such as particle size, density, boiling point, solubility
and magnetism to separation;
•  perform simple activities in group, to carry out the separation
of mixtures using local materials and write a group report;
•  compare and evaluate the different ways of separating
mixtures from products in community.
Most of the substances around us exist in the form of mixtures. How-
ever, these mixtures can be separated into pure substances using var-
ious separation techniques. The process of separating the constituent
substances of a mixture by physical methods, taking advantage of the
differences in their physical properties is called  separation process.
Some of the methods used to separate mixtures are Separation by
hand, sieving filtration, evaporation, magnetic separation,
decantation and distillation.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure 2.16 (a) the mixture contains iron fillings and sand. (b) A magnet
separates the iron fillings from the mixtures.
a b
Note that the methods for the  separation of mixtures into their
components depend on the differences in the size, magnetic property,
melting point, boiling point, solubility, etc. of the components. We will
discuss some of the methods that are used to separate the components
of mixtures.
I. Magnetic Separation
Magnetic separation is used to separate magnetic and non-magnetic
substances in a mixture. For example, if sand is mixed with iron
filings the mixture is heterogeneous. To separate the iron filings
from the sand, you can use a magnet. The iron filings (magnetic
component) are attracted by the magnet, while the sand is  not attracted.
Experiment 2.4
Title: Separation of mixture using bar magnet
Objective: To separate a mixture of iron fillings and sand
Apparatus and chemicals
Magnetic bar, Iron fillings, Sand, Petri dish/ plastic plate/bowl
Plastic bag/wrapper, Spatula
Experimental Procedure
1. Mix the sand with the iron filings in the plastic plate.
2. Wrap the plastic bag around the bar magnet
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
II.Decantation
What type of separation method is used to get a cup of clear coffee
as it is poured from coffee pot (“jebena”) as shown in Figure 2.18?
Figure 2.18: Separation by decantation
3. Suspend the bar magnet over the plate
4. The iron would be collected / attracted to the surface of themagnetic
bar
5. Carefully remove the plastic bag around the magnetic bar and
scrape off the iron filings
Figure 2.17 mixture of sand and iron fillings
Observation and analysis
1.Why was the sand not attracted by the magnet? What can you
conclude from this experiment?
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Separating funnel:  When two liquids do not mix, they form two
separate layers and are known as immiscible liquids. These two
liquids can be separated by using a separating funnel. A separating
funnel is a special type of glass funnel, which has a stop-cock in its
stem to regulate the flow of liquid. It
will separate the immiscible liquids
into two distinct layers depending
on their densities. The heavier liquid
forms the lower layer while the l
ighter one forms the upper layer.
Remove the stopper and open the
tap to run the lower layer into a
beaker. You will be left behind with
just the upper layer in thefunnel.
Collect this liquid into
Figure 2.19: Decanation of solid from a solid-liquid mixture
Decantation is the process of separation of liquid from solid and
other immiscible (non-mixing) liquids, by removing the liquid
layer at the top from the layer of solid or liquid below. The process
can be carried out by tilting the mixture after pouring out the top
layer. This process can also be used to separate two liquids that
do not mix with each other like cooking oil and water. When we
leave the mixture of cooking oil and water, two separate layers
are formed, where water at the bottom and oil, being lighter, at the
top. We can remove the oil layer from the top by pouring it into
another vessel, which leaves us with the water layer at the bottom.
Figure 2.20: Separation of
immiscible liquids using separating
funnel
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
another beaker. Examples: Kerosene and water mixture is separated
by using separating funnel method. This method is also used to
separate oil and water.
III. Filtration:
Filtration is a process by which insoluble solids can be removed from
a liquid by using a filter paper. A filter
paper is a special type of paper which
has pores that are tiny enough to let
only liquids pass through it. If you
pass a solution through filter paper,
any undissolved solid particles will
get left behind on the paper whereas
the liquid will filter through. The
liquid that passes through is called
the filtrateand the undissolved solid
particles are called residue. Example: A mixture of chalk powder and
water, soil and water, sand and salt solution, etc. can be separated
by this method. In practical application, filtration is a key step in the
purification of the tap water you drink.
Figure 2.21: Filtration
Iv. Evaporation
Perform the following activity.
Dissolve sodium chloride (or any
other soluble salt) and water to form
a homogeneous mixture (solution).
How can you recover the salt again?
Evaporation is a method used to separate a soluble solid from a
liquid in a solution or the process. of vaporizing the solvent to
obtain the solute. It is used to separate a mixture containing a
non-volatile, soluble solid from its volatile, liquid solvent. We can
separate salt from a solution by evaporating the water from the solution.
Figure 2.22: Evaporation of a solution
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
.
V . Distillation:
This method is used for the separation of a mixture containing two
miscible liquids that boil without decomposing and have a large
difference between their boiling points. It is also used in obtaining
pure water from salt solution. Process of conversion of a liquid into
vapor by boiling, and then re-condensing the vapor into liquid is
called distillation.  In simple distillation, a mixture is heated and the
most volatile component vaporizes at the lowest temperature. The
vapor passes through a cooled tube (a condenser), where it condenses
back into its liquid state. The condensate that is collected is called
distillate. Figure 2.23  show the simple distillation set up
Figure 2.23: simple distillation set up
A mixture of two miscible liquids can also be separated by simple
distillation. Liquids which mix with each other to form a solution are
called miscible liquids. The mixture of alcohol and water, benzene
and oil are some examples of miscible liquids. Consider a mixture
of alcohol and water. Ethanol, which is an alcohol boils at 78°C, and
water boils at 100°C. When the mixture is heated, the alcohol, which
has the lower boiling point vaporizes more rapidly than the water. The
vapor of alcohol passes through the condenser and then collected as a
distillate in the receiver.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Perform the following tasks in groups and present your conclusion
to the class. The following mixtures can be separated using a
combination of separation techniques. Mention all the possible
separation techniques.
i   Mixture of salt, sand and water
ii  Mixture of common salt, iron filling and salt
iii Mixture of oil, water and sand
iv  sugar and clay
Is one separation method enough when salt and sand is mixed with
water? Sometimes to separate such mixture may require combination
of two or more techniques. For example, a mixture of common salt
and sand can be separated by using the process of dissolving, filtra -
tion and evaporation. The first stage of separation is adding water to
the mixture. The salt dissolves in water and forms a solution, but not
the sand. Then by using filtration, the sand can be separated from the
salt solution. Finally evaporation of the filtrate will cause the water to
escape leaving the salt behind.
Perform the following tasks by asking your parents/guardians /
grandparents/elders in the neighborhood on the separation tech-
niques used in daily lives. Prepare a table of such activities of daily
life in which sedimentation,
decantation, filtration and evaporation are used/occurs. Then
present your findings to the whole class.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
2.5.2. Application of Separation Techniques.
Separation of mixtures using local materials
There is a mixture of table salt, sulfur powder and iron filing inside a
beaker.
By using any local materials that are found around you, you should
try to separate this mixture into their components.
Hint: Both sulfur powder and iron filing  are insoluble in water
whereas sodium chloride (table salt) is soluble in water.
Write a group report: In your report indicate the separation
techniques and the materials used during the separation processes.
Is one separation method enough when salt and sand is mixed with water?
Sometimes to separate such mixture may require combination of two or more
techniques. For example, a mixture of common salt and sand can be separated by
using the process of dissolving, filtration and evaporation. The first st age of
separation is adding water to the mixture. The salt dissolves in water and forms a
solution, but not the sand. Then by using filtration, the sand can be separated from
the salt solution. Finally evaporation of the filtrate will cause the water to es cape
leaving the salt behind.
2.5.2. Application of separation techniques.
Perform the following task s by ask ing your parents/guardians
/grandparents/elders in the neighborhood on the separation techniques used in
daily lives. Prepare a table of such activities of daily life in which sedimentation,
decantation, filtration and evaporation are used/occurs. Then present your
findings to the whole class.
Table 2.5 application of various separation techniques
No. Physical process Application
Filtration  River water is potable
 Separation of honey from its comb
Evaporation  Common salt is obtained from sea
water on large scale.
Distillation  Alcoholic beverage such as
whisky, gin, brandy, areki are
manufactured.
Magnetic separation  To separate iron and steel from non
–magnetic objects such as, glass,
plastic, aluminum, etc.
Sedimentation followed by
decantation
 Drink homemade coffee, tella
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
I. Give short answers for the following questions.
1. How would you separate the following?
a. salt solution                b. Common salt and sand
c. iron and charcoal        d. Oil, water and sand
e. nitrogen and oxygen
2. Name the separation technique shown in the following diagram
A
D E F
B C
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Key Terms
Matter              Magnetic Separation     Physical Changes
Particle Theory     Decantation               Compounds
Diffusion               Pure Substance      Elements
Physical Property     Mixture                         Distillation
Chemical Property   Non Metal                Evaporation
Homogeneous          Heterogeneous               Filtration
Mixture                     Mixture
Sublimation     Density                          Freezing
Boiling Point     Freezing Point
Unit Summary
• Matter is anything that has mass and occupies space. It can exist in
three states: solid, liquid, and gas.
• The idea that matter is made up of tiny particles is called the
Particulate nature of matter.
• Particle theory of matter tell us the particles of matter are always
moving.
• Diffusion is the mixing and spreading out of a substance with
another substance due to the movement or motion of its particles.
• The three states of matter (solids, liquids and gases) can be
interconverted without changing the composition of the substance.
to change a substance from one state to another, energy must be
added or removed. Melting, freezing, evaporation, and condensation
are all changes of state.
•  A physical property can be measured and observed without changing
the composition or identity of a substance.
•  A chemical property is a characteristic of a substance that describes
the way the substance undergoes or resists change to form a new
substance.
•  Matter can be classified in terms of its chemical composition into
two broad categories:  pure substances and mixtures pure substances.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
•  A pure substance is a single kind of matter that cannot be separated
into other kinds of matter by any physical means.
•  Pure substances are classified as elements and compounds.
•  An element is a pure substance that cannot be broken down into
simpler substances by ordinary chemical means.
•  A compound is a pure substance composed of two or more elements
that are combined chemically in a definite proportion by mass.
• A mixture is a physical combination of two or more pure
substances  in which each substance retains its own properties.
•  A homogeneous mixture (also known as solution) has a
uniform composition and properties throughout.
•   Heterogeneous mixture is a mixture that does not have a
uniform composition throughout.
•  Changes are classified as either physical or chemical changes.
•  A physical change is a process in which a substance changes its
physical appearance but not its chemical composition.
•  A chemical change is a process in which a substance undergoes
a change in chemical composition.
•   Mixtures can be separated using a variety of techniques. The
process of separating the constituent substances of a mixture by
physical methods, taking advantage of the differences in their
physical properties is called separation process.
•   Some of the methods used to separate mixtures are Separation by
hand, Sieving Filtration, evaporation, magnetic separation,
decantation and distillation
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
4. The particular physical state of substance depends on _
A. temperature                                       B.  pressure
C. strength of intermolecular  force      D. all
5. Which of the following has no definite shape and volume?
A. Water     B. carbon dioxide     C. iron      D.  gold
Part I. Write ‘True’ for the correct statements, and ‘False’ for the
wrong statements.
1. Depending upon the temperature, water can exist in solid,
liquid or gas states.
2. A gas has neither a definite volume nor a definite shape.
3. Dust, smoke, bacteria, air born viral particles are components
of particulate matter.
4. Elements can be further decomposed by ordinary chemical
means.
5. Heterogeneous mixture contains one phase.
Part II: Choose the corect answers for the following questions
1. All of the followings are matter except
A. plant     B. stone   C. air    D. sound
2. Which of the following decrease during the phase (state)
changes of
Solids             liquids             gases
A. Degree of order among particles
B. Energies of particles
C. Speed of particles
D. Distance among particles
3. Which of the following is not the property of solids
A. Solids have little tendency to diffuse
B. Solids are extremely difficult to compress
C. Solids are fluids
D. Solids have definite volume and definite shapes
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
6. The interaction of substance with light results
A. taste     B. odor    C. color     D. texture
7. Which of the following is not a physical change?
A. sublimation of iodine           C. tearing a piece of cloth
B. burning of wax in a candle   D. dissolving sugar in a tea
8. All of the following are heterogeneous mixtures except
A soil                                         C. salt solution
B. mixture of water and oil       D. blood
9. Which of the following is not a metal
A.  iron    B. sulfur   C. copper   D. sodium
10. Which of the following has variable composition?
A. Water       B. salt      C. milk      D. silver
11. A mixture of sand and sugar can be separated by
A. evaporation followed by distillation
B. filtration followed by evaporation
C. dissolution followed by filtration and evaporation
D. dissolution followed by evaporation and filtration.
12. the conversion of a vapor directly to solid without passing
through a liquid state is called___________
A. fusion  B. evaporation C. sublimation   D. deposition
13. Distillation is used in the process of preparation of
A. coffee     B. areki     C.tella    D. honey
14.  Identify the heterogeneous mixture among the following
A. sea water       B. blood      C. bronze     D. air
15. Grade 7 students in a certain school were given the task of
separating, iron fillings, sand and salt. Which of the following
process is the most appropriate order?
A.Evaporation-dissolution - filtration- magnetic separation
B. Dissolution –magnetic separation - filtration_ evaporation
C. Magnetic separation -dissolution - filtration –evaporation
D. Magnetic separation - dissolution – evaporation-  filtration
16. I. Physical changes are easily reversible.
II. Physical change do not produce new substance
III. Physical change do not involve change in mass.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
A                                                                 B
1.  Melting (fusion)            A.    process of changing liquid to gas
2.  Evaporation                   B.    process of changing liquid to solid
3.  Sublimation                   C.   Process of changing solid to gas
4.  Freezing                         D.   Process of changing gas to solid
5.  Deposition                      E.   process of changing gas  to liquid
6.  Condensation                 F.   Process of changing solid to liquid
Part IV; Fill in the blanks with appropriate terms.
1.  Immiscible liquids can be separated by using_________
2.  Separating a solid from a solution by cooling is______
3.  The separation technique that involves heating a solution until the
liquid changes into a gaseous state, leaving behind a solid is
known as____
4.  When rain falls, this is because the water vapor in the clouds is
condensing into liquid _________?
5.  I put dirty water into a funnel with a paper lining. Clean water
comes out of the funnel into my beaker, and solid dirt gets left
behind on the paper. This is an example of___________.
Part V: Give short answer to the following questions
1. What is diffusion?
2. Why do solids have fixed shape and volume?
3. Write the difference between extensive and intensive physical
properties.
Which of the above statement are correct?
A.I      B I and III    C.II and III   D. I, II and III
17. Which two state of matter are fluids?
A. Solid and liquid      C. Liquid and gas
B. Solid and gas           D. Plasma and solid
18. All of the following are same process. EXCEPT
A. Condensation                          C. Crystallization
B. Freezing                                   D. Solidification
Part III: Match the items in column ‘A’ with items in column ‘B’
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Unit 3  ELEMENTS,COMPOUND AND
CHEMICAL REACTION
At the end of this unit, you will be able to:
•   compare elements to compounds and how they are
represented by symbols and formulae;
•   identify and write symbols of common elements
or compounds;
•   name compounds given their formula and write
formula given the name of the compound;
•   use symbols and chemical formulae as a way of
communicating information about elements and
compounds;
•   state and apply the law of conservation of mass to
writing balanced equations;
•   interpret chemical formulae of,compounds in terms
of the elements present and the ratios of their atoms.
3.3 Simple Chemical Reactions and Equations
3.4 Uses of Chemical Reactions in every day Situation
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Unit 3  ELEMENTS,COMPOUND AND
CHEMICAL REACTION
Form a group and discuss the following questions and share your
ideas with the rest of the class.
1. From your previous knowledge, what is an element?
2.  List some common elements you are familiar with. Try to
classify them as
a. metal     b. non -metal
3.1. Elements and Their Representation
3.1.1. Common Elements
Introduction
Pure substance, whether an element or compound, has its own
unique name, symbol or formula. Scientists use chemical symbols in
place of the names of the elements because it helps for scientists in
writing chemical formulas and equations. The symbols and formulas
are designed in such a way that they are internationally accepted.
Therefore, they  enable    all    scientists  in  the   world     to  communicate
easily. Symbols and formulas of elements or compounds are used in
certain combination-ratios as a short hand representation of chemical
reaction and these short hand languages is known as chemical
equation.
An element is a pure substance that cannot be broken down into
simpler substances by ordinary chemical means. An element compose
of only one kind of matter (atoms).There are 118 known elements.92
out of 118 elements are naturally occurring elements.
As you have learnt in unit two, elements are classified as metal and
nonmetals. Oxygen, aluminum, iron, calcium, sodium, potassium,
magnesium, hydrogen, nitrogen, gold, silver, copper, sulfur, and
chlorine are some common elements.
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define element;
• identify symbols of some common elements;
• write chemical symbols for common elements.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
3.1.2 Chemical Symbols
Perform the following activities in group. Then present your opinion
to the whole class.
1. What is an atomic symbol?
2. Explain why do some symbols for examples He, Cl and Si have two
letters?
Scientists use symbols as abbreviation of names of an elements. An
atomic symbol is defined as shorthand way of representing elements
or atoms of an element. Every element has its own symbol. No two
elements can have the same symbol.
How to write symbols of elements?
Chemists use chemical symbols in place of the names of the elements
because they are much easier and quicker to write a symbol. A symbol
for an element is taken from the first letter or the first letter plus another
letters of the common name or Latin/Greek name of the element. If a
symbol has one letter, it is written in capital, letter besides if it has two
letters, the first is in capital and the second is in small letter.
For example, S stands for sulfur, O stands for oxygen, and K represents
potassium. In the case of potassium, the symbol is derived from the
Latin name, Kalium.
Why	are	not	all	elements	symbolized	by	the	first	letter	of	their
names?
The names of some elements such as carbon and calcium begin with
the same letter “C”. Therefore we cannot use the letter “C” as a sym-
bol for both elements. Hence two letters are used for other elements
except one. The first letter “C” is assigned as a symbol for carbon.
The other element calcium is represented by two letter symbols Ca
The same thing is true for hydrogen and helium. The first letter “H”
is assigned as a symbol for hydrogen while “He” symbol stands for
element helium.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
.The same things true for hyd rogen and helium. The first letter ―H‖ is assigned as a
symbol for hydrogen while ―He‖ symbol stands for element helium.
Table 3.1: Name and symbols of some elements
Name of elements    Symbol Name of
elements
Symbol
Hydrogen H Magnesium Mg
Helium. He Aluminum Al
Lithium Li Silicon Si
Beryllium Be Phosphorus P
Boron B Sulfur S
Carbon C Chlorine Cl
Nitrogen N Argon Ar
Oxygen O Calcium Ca
Fluorine F Zinc Zn
Neon Ne Bromine Br
Magnesium Mg Iodine I
Symbols of element derived from their Latin names are listed below.
Table 3.2: Symbols of element derived from Latin names
English name Latin name   Symbol
Sodium Natrium Na
Potassium Kalium K
Iron Ferrum Fe
Copper Cuprum Cu
Silver Argentum Ag
Table 3.2: Symbols of element derived from Latin names
English name                 Latin name                 Symbol
Sodium                  Natrium                Na
Potassium                  Kalium                K
Iron                               Ferrum                Fe
Copper                 Cuprum                Cu
Silver                              Argentum                Ag
Gold                              Aurum                Au
Lead                              Plumbum                Pb
Tin                              Stannum                Sn
Mercury                Hydrargyrum                Hg
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
• define valence numbers as the combining power of an atom.
• write the formulae of simple binary compounds using symbols
and valences.
• name binary compounds.
• describe polyatomic ion.
• write the chemical formulas of common compounds that
contain polyatomic ions.
I. Write true for correct statement and false for wrong statement
1.Ca is the symbol of sodium.
2.Water is not an element.
3.Elements are pure substances.
Choose the correct answer from the given alternatives.
4.Which of the following is the correct chemical symbol for silicon?
A. S               B. Si             C. SI             D. Sl
5.“C” stands for_____
A. calcium    B. Chlorine   C. Carbon     D. Copper
III. Fill the missing symbols and names of the elements in the
following table
Name of element         Symbol      Name of element     Symbol
Potassium             Iodine
He                           B
Chlorine                       calcium
Cu           Nikel
Gold                                                          H
Li           silver
3.2. Compounds and their Representation
After completing this section, you will be able to
• define compound as a substance formed when two or more
elements chemically combined together.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
• Name compounds containing polyatomic ions.
• Identify the elements and number of atoms, and give a chemical
formula.
3.2.1.  Compounds
Form a group and discuss the following questions and share your
ideas with the rest of the class.
1.   From your previous knowledge, what is a compound?
2.   Copy the table on your exercise book and classify the
substance as an element or, a compound.
Substance                  Element           Compound
Sodium chloride
(table salt)
Water
Gold
As you have learnt in unit two, a compound is a pure substance consists
of two or more elements which have been chemically combined. For
example, water is a compound of hydrogen and oxygen. Each of
its molecules contains two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom.
There are many different compounds. Some examples of compounds
are sodium chloride, iron sulfide, carbon dioxide, sugar, calcium
carbonate, calcium oxide, etc.
3.2.2. Chemical Formulas
It is the symbolic representationof an element or a compound.
Chemical formulas can be classified as formulas of elements and
formulas of compounds.
Formulas of Elements
The formula of an element consists of one kind of symbol.
A molecule is the smallest particle of an element or a compound that
has a stable,independent existence.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
The elements helium,neon,argon,krypton,xenon and radon are collectively known
as noble gas.Because they exist uncombined as single atoms,they are also known
as monoatomic gases. Their formula are the same as their symbols.Example He for
Helium, Ne for Neon Ar for Argon.
Some nonmetallic elements exist as molecules containing two, four, or eight
atoms. Hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, chlorine, bromine and iodine are
found as diatomic molecules.
Table 3.3 symbols and formulas of diatomic elements.
Name Symbol Formula
Hydrogen H H2
Nitrogen N N2
Oxygen O O2
Fluorine F F2
Chlorine Cl Cl2
Bromine Br Br2
Iodine I I2
Elemental formula also found in homo  polyatomic molecules that contain more
than two atoms. Examples
Ozone-O3, Phosphorus-P4   and Sulfur-S8
Formulas of compound
Elements combine to form compounds. Just as symbol is a shorthand way of
representing element, a chemical formula comprising two or more different
symbols, is a short hand representation of a compound. In formulas of compound,
the following points are noticed.
 In each formula, the symbol of elements which form the compound are given. Each
symbol is immediately followed by a subscript showing the number of atoms of
that element.
The elements helium,neon,argon,krypton,xenon and radon are
collectively known as noble gas, or monoatomic gases Because they
exist uncombined as single atoms,they are also known as monoatomic
gases. Their formula is the same as their symbol.Example He for
Helium, Ne for Neon,  Ar for Argon.
Some nonmetallic elements exist as molecules containing two, four, or
eight atoms. Hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, chlorine, bromine
and iodine are found as diatomic molecules.
Elemental formula also found in homo polyatomic molecules that
contain more than two atoms. Examples Ozone-O3, Phosphorus-P4
and Sulfur-S8
Formulas of Compounds
Elements combine to form compounds. Just as symbol is a shorthand
way of representing an element, a chemical formula comprising two or
more different symbols, is a short hand representation of a compound.
In formulas of a compound, the following points are noticed.
• In each formula, the symbol of elements which form the compound
are given. Each symbol is immediately followed by a subscript
showing the number of atoms of that element.
• Chemical formulas indicate the relative number of atoms of each
element present in the compound.
• For example, water (H2O) is a compound of hydrogen and
oxygen. Each of its molecules contains two hydrogen atoms (2H)
and one oxygen atom (O).
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
3.2.3. Valence Number
Discuss in groups and share your ideas to the class
What is a valence number?
Elements combine in accordance with the laws of nature at atomic
levels. Each element in a formula of a compound has a combining
power. The combining power of an element is called valence. If we
know the combining power (valence number) of the elements, it is
easy to write the formula of a compound. Most common elements
have valence 1, 2, or 3. Some elements have more than one valence
number, which is different combining powers under different
conditions. Common examples of these elements that have variable
valence are iron, copper, lead and tin.Ions are atoms that have positive
or negative charge. The number of negative or positive charge an ions
carries is equal to the valence number of the ion.Thus, the valences of
Cl-, O2- and Al3+ are 1, 2 and 3 respectively. The following table shows
the combining power of some common elements.
I.Choose the correct answer from the given alternatives.
1.  Elements exists as a diatomic and polyatomic molecular form
except_______.
A. phosphorus       B Nitrogen      C Oxygen      D Neon
2. For which of the following do the atom and molecule have
different formula?
A. Helium              B. Argon         C. Nitrogen    D. Neon
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
3.2.4. Formulas of Binary Compounds
Binary compounds are compounds formed from two different types
of elements. To write formulas of binary compounds, follow the
following simple rule
i. Write the symbol of the elements.
ii. Write the valence number above the symbol.
iii. Criss-cross the valence numbers to conserve charge or to
become the compound electrically neutral and write below the
symbols. If the valence number is one, omit the subscript.
Examples
a.  Write the chemical formula for Potassium iodide
Solution
Since the subscript is 1 we omit and the chemical formula for
Potassium iodide is KI.
b.  Write the chemical formula for calcium chloride
valences of of Cl -, O2- and Al3+= are 1, 2 and 3 respectively. The follo wing table
shows the combining power of some common elements.
Table 3.4: valences of some common elements.
Elements Valence 1 Valence 2 Valence 3
Name symbol Name symbol Name symbol
Metals Lithium Li Magnesium Mg Aluminum Al
Sodium Na Calcium Ca Iron(III) Fe
Potassium K Iron(II) Fe
Copper(I) Cu Zinc Zn
Silver Ag Lead(II) Pb
Non-metal Chlorine Cl Oxygen O Nitrogen N
Bromine Br Sulfur S
Iodine I
Fluorine F
3.2.4. Formulas of Binary Compounds
Binary compounds are compounds formed from two different types of elements.
To write formulas of binary compounds, follow the following simple rule
i. Write the symbol of the elements
ii. Write the valence number above the symbol
iii. Criss-cross the valence numbers to conserve charge or to become the comp ound
electrically neutral and write below the symbols. If the valence number is one omit
the subscript.
Examples write the formula for
a.  Write the chemical formula for Potassium iodide
Solution
Step 2:
Step 1:  K    I
K     I
1 1
Step 3: K I
1 1
= K1I1
Valence 2 Valence 3
Step 2:
Step 1:  K    I
K     I
1 1
Step 3: K I
1 1
= K1I1
K I
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Since the subscript is 1  we omit and the chemical formula for Potassium iodide is
KI.
b. Write the chemical formula for calcium chloride
Solution
Step 1          Ca      Cl
Ca Cl
2 1
Step 2:
Step 3 Ca Cl
2 1
CaCl2=
Therefore, the chemical formula for of
calcium chloride is CaCl2
I. Give short answers
1. Write the chemical formula for
A .Copper (II) oxide    B. Magnesium nitride      C. sodium chloride
D. Aluminum Oxide E. Iron (III) Oxide
F. Iron (II) bromide       G. Silver Oxide       H. Calcium fluoride
2. Write the chemical name for
A. MgO     B. FeS    C. AgCl
II. Choose the correct answer from the given alternative
3. Which of the following is the chemical formula of aluminum nitride
A. Al5N3        B. Al3N2      C. AlN3       D. AlN
4. How many valence number for aluminum? A. 1   B. 2   C. 3     D.5
3.2.5. Naming Binary Compounds
Activity:3.5
Perform the following activities.
A student wrote this name for a compound made of calcium and sulfur: Sulfur
calcium. What is  wrong with this name? Write the correct name for the
compound.2.
Therefore, the chemical formula of calcium chloride is CaCl 2
I. Give short answers
1. Write the chemical formula for
A .Copper (II) oxide
B. Magnesium nitride
C. sodium chloride
D. Aluminum Oxide
E. Iron (III) Oxide
F. Iron (II) bromide
G. Silver Oxide
H. Calcium fluoride
2. Write the chemical name for
A. MgO     B. FeS    C. AgCl
II. Choose the correct answer from the given alternatives.
3. Which of the following is the chemical formula of aluminum
nitride?
A. Al5N3        B. Al3N2      C. AlN3       D. AlN
4. How many valence numbers does an Aluminium have?
A. 1                B. 2               C. 3              D.5
3.2.5. Naming Binary Compounds
Activity:3.5
Perform the following activities.
A student wrote this name for a compound made of calcium and sulfur:
Sulfur calcium. What is wrong with this name? Write the correct
name for the compound.
Ca Cl
2 1
Step 2:
Step 3 Ca Cl
2 1
CaCl2=
In naming a compound, the positive ion (metal) mentioned first
followed by the negative ion (nonmetal). Binary compound is a
compound that is made of only two different elements in a certain
whole number ratio.
Solution
Step 1          Ca      Cl
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Rules for naming simple binary compounds.
1.If the binary compounds consists of metal and non -metal, the
name of the metal named by its elemental name while the last letters
of the non-metal is replaced by the suffix-ide.
Table 3.5 Names of nonmetallic elements in binary compounds
2.There are metals that form more than one positive ions. In naming
compounds of metals with more than one valence number, state
valence with Roman number in bracket to indicate positive charge.
Thus Fe2+ is Iron (II) (read as ‘’ iron two ‘’) and Fe3+ is iron (III) (read
as “iron three”)
3.2.6. Polyatomic Ions
Ions are atoms or a group of atoms that have positive or negative charges.
They can be simple ions as Cl-, O2- and Al3+ or polyatomic ions as
NH4
+,OH-,NO3
-, SO4
2-  and  PO4
3-
A polyatomic ion,  also called compound ion is positively or negatively
charged group of atoms. The following tables give the valence number
of some polyatomic ions.
Table 3.6 some common valence of polyatomic ions
Nonmetallic    Name in Binary      Non-metallic    Name in Binary
Element          compounds              Element compounds
Nitrogen        Nitride                 Bromine               Bromide
Oxygen        Oxide                 Iodine               Iodide
Fluorine        Fluoride       Phosphorous    Phosphide
Chlorine        Chloride       Sulfur              Sulfide
Valence 1                      Valence  2                  Valence 3
Ammonium ion  (NH4
+) Sulfate ion(SO4
2-)       Phosphate ion (PO4
3-)
Hydroxide ion (OH-) Carbonate ion(CO3
2-)  Phosphite ion(PO3
3-)
Nitrate ion (NO3
-)            Sulfite ion (SO3
2-)
Nitrite  (NO2
-)
Hydrogen carbonate
(HCO3
-)
Hydrogen sulfate ion
(HSO4
-)
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
In writing chemical formulas of compounds that contain polyatomic
ions, follow the same steps you used for writing formulas of binary
compounds and use bracket if the valence number is different from
1 and not simplified.
Examples
1. Write the formula for ammonium chloride
Step 1    NH4+      Cl-
Step 2     NH4+      Cl-
Step  3  NH4
+      Cl-
So the molecular formula for ammonium chloride is =NH4Cl
2. write the formula ammonium sulfate
Step 1    NH4+      SO42-
Step 2     NH4+      SO42-
Step  3  NH4
+      Cl-
So the molecular formula for ammonium sulfate is (NH4)2SO4
In naming compounds containing polyatomic ions, the name of
metals and ammonium ion are written first followed by the name of
the polyatomic ions.
Examples: NH4Cl (ammonium chloride), Al2(SO4)3  (aluminum
sulfate) and FeCl3  Iron (III)chloride,
1. Fill in the blank by writing the formula of a compound
Ions    Nitrate          Sulfate         Carbonate              Phosphate
Na+    _________     ________       __________  ___________
Ca2+   _________     ________       __________  ___________
Al3+   _________     ________       __________   ___________
NH4 + _________     ________       __________  ___________
Fe3+    _________     ________       __________  ___________
2. Name the following compounds.
A. NH4Cl                   C. NaHCO3
B. Cu(NO3)2               D.   FePO4
3. Which three elements are combine in magnesium carbonate?
4. Which four elements are combine in ammonium sulfate?
SO42-
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
3.2.7 Interpreting Formula
1. What information is obtained from the coefficient and subscript in a
formula?
When a formula is interpreted, it will give qualitative and quantitative
meanings. Chemical symbols and formulas with numbers around them at
particular positions give specific information. Thus, symbols and formulas of
elements have qualitative and quantitative meaning.
Qualitatively : A symbol represents the identity (kind) of the element.
A formula represents the kinds or types of element involved in forming a
compound. For example:
• Cl2 qualitatively the subscript 2 shows a chlorine molecule.
• The symbol O represents an atom of oxygen. No other element can
be represented by the symbol O.
• Fe stands for iron metal
• CaO is qualitatively stands for calcium oxide made from one atom
of calcium and one atom of oxygen.
• Ca (NO3)2 qualitatively stands for calcium nitrate made from one
atom of calcium and two nitrate groups.
Quantitatively: a symbol represents the number of atoms of the elements.
A formula stands for one molecule or for formula unit of an element or a
compound. In Cl2  quantitatively 2 shows there are two atoms in chlorine
molecule
• Number preceding symbols, called coefficient, indicates the number
of atoms of the element in a formula.
2Fe stands for two atoms of iron (The number 2gives a quantitative
meaning while Fe itself gives a qualitative meaning.
• A subscript written after a symbol (to the right) indicates that the element
is in molecular form. For example, Cl2 a chlorine molecule and O2 is
oxygen molecule
• The coefficient of a molecule or formula unit indicates the number of
molecules or formula unit of that substance.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
• 3H2O;the coefficient three shows that there are 3 molecules of water
2CO2 the coefficient 2 shows that there are 2 molecules of carbon
dioxide 4NaCl the coefficient 4 shows that there are 4 formula unit of
sodium chloride.
CaO quantitatively it shows one formula unit of CaO
Ca(NO3)2  quantitatively it shows one formula unit of Ca(NO3)2
1. What does 3H2O represents?
A.3H2O atoms           B. 6 H molecule
C.3 H2O molecule     D. 3O molecule
2 write the qualitative meaning for
A. 2Fe       B.  CO2           C.  O2
3. Write the quantitative meaning for the following.
A. 3H2              B.   4H2O           C.  2NaCl
Write and interpret formulae of common compounds
By using reference materials, such as a Science books and/or the
Internet, try to discover the formulae of common compounds such as
baking soda, Vinegar (acetic acid), lime ,sugar(sucrose),chalk, milk
of magnesia etc. and interpret them in terms of the elements present
and the ratios of their atoms
After completing this section, you will be able to
• define chemical reaction and give examples;
• describe evidences that show chemical reaction has occurred;
• state the law of conservation of mass;
• conduct an experiment in a group to show simple chemical reaction;
• write a chemical equation;
• balance simple chemical equation by inspection;
• create and use models of particles to demonstrate balanced
equations.
3.3.  Simple chemical Reactions and Equations
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Discuss in groups and share your ideas with the rest of the class
1.Give some examples of chemical changes that takes place
in your home or school.
2. What kind of chemical changes occurred when you coo food?
3. Imagine that you drop a glass beaker and it breaks down.
a. Is a new substance formed?
b. Is this a physical change or chemical change?
3.3.1. Simple chemical Reaction
The starting materials in chemical reaction called reactants, react
alone or with each other to produce one or more new substances,
called products.
A chemical reaction involves the transformation of reactants
into products.
Reactants                   Products
An arrow (     ) separates the two side and can be read as ‘produce’,
‘give’,form’,’yield’.
Reactants are always written on the left hand side of the arrow while
product is/are written on the right hand side by putting “+” sign read
as ‘and’ if there are two or more products. The “+” sign means “com-
bines with” or “reacts with”.  For example when magnesium is in its
metal form it will burn very easily in air. In burning of magnesium, the
reactants are magnesium and oxygen while the product is the white
ash known as magnesium oxide.
Similarly in the reaction between iron and sulfur, the iron and sulfur atoms
are reactants where as the formed new substance Iron sulfide is the product.
By chemical reaction, some of the common examples of changes
brought about Rusting of iron, Fermentation and Digestion of food.
2Mg + O2                                  2MgO
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
3.3.2 Evidences that Show Chemical Reaction has Occurred
Figure 3.1: blue copper sulfate solution
Form a group and perform the following activity.Then present your
finding to the rest of the class.
Record and describe the various chemical changes that occur in your
daily lives (e.g cooking food, etc.) and describe the evidence you use
to determine that chemical reaction occurred.
In a chemical reaction, new products are formed from the
reactants. How can you tell this happened? There are few
signs that indicate a chemical reaction has occurred. These are:
1. Color changes
Gently heating black copper oxide with sulfuric acid produce a
blue solution of copper sulfate.
Copper oxide + sulfuric acid                        copper sulfate + water
(Black)                                                                    (Blue)
2. Evolution of a gas (formation of bubbles)
When magnesium is placed in hydrochloric acid, bubble of
hydrogen gas are given off.
Magnesium + hydrochloric acid           magnesium chloride + hydrogen
3.Change of temperature (heat change):-either endothermic or
exothermic
When potassium is placed in water, hydrogen gas is given off. The
reaction produces so much heat that the gas burns.
Potassium + water               potassium hydroxide + hydrogen
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
3.3.3. Law of Conservation of Mass
Form a group and perform the following activity. Then present your
opinion to the class.
When we burn something it gets lighter or, in other words, it loses mass.
For example when paper burn, the solid ash left over is lighter than the
original paper. Does it mean that mass is not conserved? Discuss in
groups and present your ideas to the whole class?
The law of conservation of mass states that matter is neither
created nor destroyed during a chemical reaction. It means that
the mass of reactants is exactly equal to the mass of the products.
4. Precipitate (formation of a solid)
If you mix solutions of silver nitrate and sodium chloride, a chemi-
cal reaction takes place. In the reaction insoluble solids are formed.
This is called a precipitate. The solid is silver chloride.
Silver nitrate + sodium chloride              silver chloride  +  sodium
nitrat
Figure 3.2 white precipitate of AgCl
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure 3.3: burning of magnesium
3.3.4. Investigating Chemical Reaction
Expriment 3.1
Title: burning of Magnesium ribbon
Objective: to investigate the chemical reaction
Apparatus: Burner, crucible, a pair of tongs
Chemicals:  Magnesium ribbon
Procedure
1. Take about 5 cm of magnesium ribbon. Rub its surface gently
with an abrasive. Notice its color and hardness.
2. Hold it by a pair of tongs and burn it.
Hazards!!!
In addition to being extremely bright, burning magnesium produces
some ultraviolet light; avoid looking directly at it. The burning
magnesium is very hot; do not touch it or let it come in contact with
other flammable materials.
3.Collect the substance formed .Then add in a crucible and examine
it carefully. Feel it. Notice its color.
Observation and analysis
1. What is the reactant materials?
2. Does it bend? It is shiny? Will it burn if heated again? Does it have
any resemblance to the magnesium ribbon you started with?
3. Is chemical (change) reaction occur?
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
1. What is chemical equation?
A chemical equation is a short hand expression of a chemical chanes
(chemical reaction) through symbols and formulas.
In general, to write a chemical equation for a given reaction one can
follow the following three steps.
Step 1: Write a word equation for the reaction.
Step 2: Change the word equation to a chemical equation i.e., write
the correct symbol or formula for each reactant and product.
Step 3: Balance the equation so that it obeys the law of conservation
of mass.
Example: the reaction between hydrogen and oxygen to give water.
Step1: Hydrogen + Oxygen → Water
Step 2: H2 + O2 → H2O
Step 3: 2H2 + O2 → 2H2O
3.3.5. Writing and Balancing Simple Chemical Equation
3.3.6. Balancing Chemical equation
Perform the following activity
Why should the chemical equation be balanced?
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Chemical equation is balanced in order to obey the law of conservation
of mass.So a  balanced chemical equation is an equation in which
the total number of atoms on the left hand side are equal to the total
number of atoms on the right hand side. When we balance a Chemical
equation, we have to change the coefficients not subscripts. This is
because, changing subscripts changes the identity of substances. In
balanced chemical equation:
Mass reactants = mass of products
Number of atoms in reactant side = Number of atoms in product side
There are many methods of balancing chemical equations. Only 2
methods of balancing chemical equations are discussed in this grade
level, namely
1. The inspection method
2. Least common multiple (LCM) method
1. The inspection method-  is trial and error method. It involves
examining the equation and adjusting the coefficients until each kind
of atoms are equal on the reactant and product sides.
For example, to balance the equation when nitrogen react with
hydrogen
to give ammonia
N2 + H2                   NH3
Balance nitrogen by placing 2 before ammonia
N2 + H2                    2NH3
Now you have 6 hydrogen atoms on the product side. To balance
hydrogen write a coefficient 3 before H2
N2 + 3 H2                    2NH3
Finally check whether the equation balanced or not
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Reactants            Products
N  (2)                       N  (2)
H  (6)                       H  (6)
Therefore, the equation is balanced
Reactants Products
Al  (4)              Al  (4
O (6)              O (6)
So the equation is balanced
Step 5: Divide the LCM by each total valence number to obtain
the coefficients for each of the reactants and products. Place
the coefficients thus obtained in front of the respective formula.
4Al + 3O2         2 Al2O3
Check
2. Least common multiple (LCM) method
The steps used in this method are shown by the following examples.
Consider the reaction between aluminum and oxygen to form
aluminum oxide.
Step 1: Represent the reaction by word equation
Aluminum    +    oxygen                aluminum oxide
Step 2: Write the correct formula for each of the reactants and products
Al + O2                  Al2O3
Step 3: Find the total valence number (subscript time’s valence number)
and place above each symbol and formula
Al + O2                    Al2O3
4 6 63
Step: 4 Find the LCM of total valence number and place it above the
arrow. The LCM of 3, 4, and 6 is 12
Al + O2                    Al2O3
4 6 6123
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
3.4  Use of Chemical Reactions in Every Day Situation
3.4.1.  Uses of Chemical Reaction
Discuss in groups and share your ideas with the rest of the class.
1. How do the local people in Ethiopia prepare alcoholic beverages
like “Tella”? What raw materials are used? Is the process a chemical
change?
2. Give some examples of useful chemical reactions such as
fermentation in brewing which produces carbon dioxide and ethanol/
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• describe the uses of chemical reactions in everyday situations.
Chemical reaction happen everywhere. It happen inside your body
to keep you alive. For example, reactions to digest food i.e. the
breakdown of large molecules (protein, starch and fats) into smaller
ones, so that they can be absorbed. Chemical reactions are an integral
part of technology of culture, and indeed of life itself. Burning fuels,
smelting iron, making glass and pottery, brewing beer, and making
wine and cheese are among many examples of activities incorporating
chemical reactions that have been known.
1. Balance the following by inspection
a.  CaCO3 (s)            CaO(s)  +  CO2(g)
b.  H2 + I2              HI
c.  C2H2(g)+O2(g)              CO2(g)+H2O(l)
d. Ca + H2O            Ca(OH)2 + H2
e. Fe2O3 +CO             Fe + CO2
2. Balance the following chemical equations
a. Fe + O2                 Fe2 O3
b. Cu + H2SO4             CuSO4 +SO2 + H2O
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Some Important Chemical Reactions
1.Synthesis of ammonia:
Reaction: 3H2(g) + N2(g)          2NH3(g)
Hydrogen gas and nitrogen gas are combined in the presence of a
catalyst at high temperature and pressure to produce ammonia gas.
Significance: Synthesis of ammonia leads to the production of
fertilizer (ammonium nitrate) and to the production of ammunitions.
2. Combustion of hydrogen
2H2(g) + O2(g)            2H2O(l)
Hydrogen gas and oxygen combine to produce liquid water.
Significance: In the forward direction this is a spontaneous reaction
that explosively oxidized hydrogen to water.
3. Combustion of methane (hydrocarbons)
Reaction:CH4(g) + 2O2(g)                CO2(g) + 2H2O(g)
Methane gas and oxygen gas combine exothermically to produce
carbon dioxide gas and water vapor.
Significance: Methane is the simplest of the hydrocarbons, all of
which combine with oxygen and undergo oxidation. If the oxidation is
complete the products are carbon dioxide (a greenhouse gas) and water.
4. Photosynthesis
Reaction: 6CO2(g) + 6H2O(l)             6O2(g) + C6H12O6(aq)
Carbon dioxide and water combine in the presence of sunlight
(and many biologically catalyzed reactions) to produce oxygen and
glucose (sugar). Significance: Our atmosphere is 21% oxygen - in
spite of the tendency of oxygen to react with so many substances.
The constant level of oxygen is maintained by the many plants
that inhabit our planet through the reaction of photosynthesis.
This is truly solar energy at its most efficient and productive.
5. Synthesis of sulfuric acid
Reaction: 2S(s) +3O2(g) + H2O(l)                  2H2SO4(aq)
Sulfur is first oxidized to sulfur dioxide and then to sulfur trioxide.
This gas is bubbled through water to produce sulfuric acid.
Significance: Sulfuric acid is a very important chemical and an
indicator of a nation’s industrial strength.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Unit summary
An atomic symbol is defined as shorthand way of representing
elements or atoms of an element.
A compound is a pure substance consists of two or more elements
which have been chemically combined.
Chemical formula is the symbolic representation of an element or a
compound.
A molecule is the smallest particle of an element or a compound that
has a stable, independent existence.
The combining power of an element is called valence. Most common
elements have valence 1, 2, or 3.
Binary compounds are compounds formed from two different types
of elements. In naming a compound, the positive ion (metal) mention
first followed by the negative ion (nonmetal).
A polyatomic ion, also called compound ion is positively or negatively
charged group of atoms.
A chemical reaction is a process in which some substances is
changed into one or more different new substances. The starting
materials in chemical reaction called reactants, react alone or with
each other to produce one or more new substances, called products.
There are few signs that indicate a chemical reaction has occurred.
These are: color change, evolution of gas, heat change and formation
of precipitate.
Key terms
Element                               Balanced Chemical Equation
Reactants                                   Chemical Symbol
Valence                               Products
Chemical Formula                     Binary Compounds
Chemical Equation                    Molecule
Poly Atomic Ion                        Law Of Conservation Of Mass
Chemical Reaction                     Inspection Method
Lcm Method
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
The law of conservation of mass states that matter is neither created
nor destroyed during a chemical reaction.
A chemical equation is shorthand expression of a chemical changes
(chemical reaction) through symbols and formulas.
There are many methods of balancing chemical equations. Some of
them are inspection method, Least common multiple (LCM) method.
I Write ‘True’ for the Correct Statements and ‘False’ for the
Wrong Statements.
1. A compound is pure substance.
2. In a chemical reaction atoms are neither created nor destroyed.
3. O2 and 2O have the same meaning.
4. The symbol copper denoted by Co.
5. When we balance chemical equation, we change the subscript but
not the coefficient.
6. Respiration is a chemical change (chemical reaction).
7. The combining power of an element is called valence.
8. The formula and symbol of nitrogen is the same.
9. A number in front of a symbol or formula is coefficient
10. A chemical symbol is a short hand notation for the chemical name
of an element.
II. Choose the correct answer from the given alternatives.
11. The Latin name of silver is
A. Argentum B. Kalium   C. Natrium   D. Cuprum
12. In 4O3 the coefficient and subscript respectively
A.3, 4      B.4,3     C.7,3       D.3,7
13. The formula of nitrate ion is
A. NO      B. NO3
-           C.  NO2
-        D.  N2
-
14. All of the following elements can exist as diatomic molecules
EXCEPT
A Hydrogen        B Oxygen       C Sodium        D Chlorine
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
III. Give short answers
18. Write the symbol of
a. Zinc    b. phosphorous   c.  Mercury   d.  calcium     e. Tin
19. Balance the following chemical equations
a. Al(OH)3              Al2O3 +H2O
b. NH3 + O2            NO +H2O
c. Ca(OH)2 + H3PO4               Ca3(PO4)2 +H2O
20. Write chemical equations for the following reactions and
balance them.
a. Aluminum + bromine         Aluminum bromide
b.  Sodium + Nitrogen            Sodium nitride
c. Potassium + Water              Potassium hydroxide + Hydrogen
15. What is the chemical formula for Iron (III) chloride?
A. FeCl2     B.FeCl      C.FeCl3      D.  Fe2Cl3
16. The chemical symbol for Helium is
A. H      B.   Hl      C.   He       D.HE
17. Which of the following is the correct name of MgO?
A. Magnesium oxygen    B.  oxygen magnesium
C. Magnesium oxide       D. molybdenum oxide
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Unit 4  CELLS AS THE BASIS OF LIFE
4.1. Microscope
4.2. Cell
At the end of this unit, you will  be able to:
• define a microscope;
• explain the use of a microscope;
• distinguish the different types of microscopes;
• describe the basic parts and functions of a microscope;
• use a microscope to view objects;
• define a cell;
• explain how cell was discovered and who discovered it;
• draw a cell and label its major parts;
• describe the functions of the major structural parts of a cell;
• distinguish between unicellular and multicellular organisms;
• give examples of cell shape;
• explain why cell shape and structure vary;
• discuss the differences of cell, tissue, organ and organ system;
• define respiration and write its chemical equation;
• define photosynthesis and write its chemical equation.
What kind of organisms found in your environment?
How can you observe those can not see by your naked eye?
Introduction
This unit deals with cell as the basis of life and organized in to two sub
units. The first one deals with the purpose and types of microscope.
The second part deals about the cell, this section focuses on
discover and definition of cell, structures of cell and their function,
types of organism, and level of organization of organism.
A cell is the smallest unit of life. Most cells are so small that they
cannot be viewed with the naked eye. Therefore, scientists must use
microscopes (magnifying) instrument to study cells.
4.1. Microscope
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
• identify the major parts and functions of a basic microscope;
• use a microscope to view objects;
• discuss the role of a microscope;
• differentiate between simple and light microscope;
• draw diagram of a microscope and label the major parts;
• build microscope from locally available materials.
Microscope have opened up a whole new dimension in science, by
using a microscope scientists were able to discover the existence of
the microorganisms, study the structure of cell, and see the smallest
parts of plants, animals, and fungi. Cells are the smallest units from
which all life forms are made.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
4.1.1 Purpose and Invention of a Microscope
What is a microscope?
A microscope is an instrument that is used to observe objects which
Can not see clearly with naked eye. A microscope uses lenses or system
of lenses to produce a magnified image of an object under study.
Microscopic means invisible to the eye unless aided by a microscope.
The science of investigating small objects using such an instrument is
called microscopy.
Word Roots and Origins
The word microscope is derived from two Greek words
“Micro” meaning tiny and “scope” meaning to view or look at
What is the use of microscope?
Microscope magnifies the size of the object observed so that it looks
bigger than its actual size. This offers a chance to closely study and
learn more about smaller organisms like cell and microorganism.
Who invented a compound microscope and when?
Dutch spectacle makers Zaccharias Janssen and Hans Lipperhey
(1595) are noted as the first men to develop the concept of the
compound microscope by placing different types and sizes of lenses
in opposite ends of tubes.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
In 1665 Robert Hooke an English scientists built compound
microscopes, which have multiple lenses. However, his microscope is a
compound microscope, the lenses are not very good and magnifications
of more than 30x are very blurred and do not show much detail.
Later in the 1674 century, Anton van Leeuwenhoek Dutch merchant
began polishing and grinding lenses when he discovered that
certain shaped lenses increased an image’s size. The glass lenses
that he created could enlarge an object many times. The quality
of his lenses allowed him, for the first in history, to see the many
microscopic animals, bacteria and intricate detail of common
objects. Leeuwenhoek is considered the founder of the study of
microscopy and played a vital role in the development of cell theory.
4.1.2. Types of a Microscope
There are many types of microscopes, and they may be grouped
in different ways. According to the type of radiation they use for
observation, microscopes grouped into two main types of microscopes
these are the light microscope and electron microscope. The light
microscope uses a beam light to form the image of an object, while
the electron microscope uses the beam of electron to form the image.
Based on the number of lenses it has and uses the light microscopes are
categorized into two simple microscope and compound microscope.
Simple light microscope
A simple microscope consists of a single convex lens that is capable
of magnifying an object. A hand lens (magnifying glass) and reading
lens an example of simple microscope. They can magnify about ten
times (10X) to twenty (20X).
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Key Terms
Microscope: an optical
instrument used to
observe very small objects.
Microscopic: very small
objects which are only
viewed with microscope.
Magnifications:	increasing
the image of an object
Lens: a piece of glass used to
converge or diverge light and
form optical images.
Resolution is ability of the
microscope to show the
detailed or the scattered
part of an object.
Key Terms
Monocular compound microscope: A compound microscope with
single eyepiece lens.
Binocular compound microscope: compound microscope with
two eye piece lens
Compound light microscope
Compound microscope is a
microscope that uses multiple
lens systems at the same time
to improve magnification and
resolution. The two lens systems
are the eyepiece (ocular) lens
and the objective lenses. The
objective lenses include:
Figure: 4.1 types of simple light
microscope
• Lower power objective (4x)
• Middle power objective (10x)
• High power objectives (40)
• Oil immersion lenses (100x)
Microscope has two major abilities: magnification and resolution
1. Magnification is increasing the size of an object to be viewed.
2. Resolution is ability of the microscope to show the detailed or
the scattered part of an object. It helps us to distinguish between
two separate points
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure 4.2 Parts of compound microscope
Table 4.1 parts of compound microscope and their function.
4.1.3.  Basic parts of compound light microscope
N.B: Your teacher will provide you with a microscope so that you
can identify the parts and their functions
Parts                           Function
Base                              Support the microscope
Arm                           Used to carry the microscope
Stages                 Supports the glass slide and contains the
specimen being Observed.
Stage clips             Holds the slide in place on the stages
Eyepiece                Magnifies image for the viewer
Objective lens        Low, medium and high power lenses that
magnifies the specimen
Course adjustment        Large knob used for focusing the images
under low power. produce rough focus of image
Arm (carrying handle)
Eye piece/Ocular/lens
Body tube
Coarse adjustment
Fine adjustment
Stage
Base
Nose piece
Middle objective lens
High objective lens
Slide clippers
Low objective lens
Diaphragm
Mirror or illumination
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Based on figure
4.3 label each parts of a microscope and relates your answare to
the actual parts of microscope.
Fine adjustment      Smaller knob used for focusing the image
with high power objectives. Sharp focus image
Diaphragm                Controls the amount of light that pass
through the specimen
Light course                Provide light for viewing the specimen
Body tube                Separates the objective and the eyepiece and
assures continuous alignment of the optics.
Figure 4.3 Parts of  microscope
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
• What component of a microscope is used to magnify an object
and in which  parts of a microscope it is located?
• Discuss the total magnification of a compound microscope.
Magnification	Power	of	Compound	Microscope
key terms
Mounting: is preparing a specimen for observation under a
microscope.
Focusing: is adjustment of focus to observe specimen clearly.
Specimen: a sample of a substance or material for examination
or study
The eyepiece lens usually magnifies ten times and is labeled 10X. The
objective lenses magnify four to hundred times. The total magnification
of an object is calculated by multiplying the magnification of the
objective lens by the magnification of the ocular lens. For example,
if the magnification of the eye lens is 10X and the magnification of
the objective lens is 4X, then the total magnification is 40X. Because
two lenses. are used, compound  microscopes are  capable of higher
magnifications than simple microscopes, which use only one lens.
Experiment 4.1
Practicing mounting and focusing
Materials you require:
• Clean slide and cover slip
• Very fine fiber
• Dropper with nipple
• Forceps
• Water in a beaker
• Compound light microscope
Procedure:
1.Lay down the very fine fiber on a clean microscope slide as
shown in the  figure 4.4
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Add a drop of            Place the specimen                        Place the edge of a coverslip       slowly lower the coverslip
water to a slide          in the water                                   on the slide so that it touches       to prevent forming and
the edge of the water                    trapping air bubble
• Place one drop of water directly over the specimen and cover it with
a cover slip.
• If you put too much water over the specimen, cover slip will  float
on top of the water.
• Air bubbles confuse the observer.
• Cover slips protect objective lens and keep the specimen in position
3. Place the slide on the microscope stage, with the specimen directly
over the center of the glass circle on the stage (directly over the light).
4. Always start and end with Low Power objective. Change objective
lens to the lowest point, then focus using first the coarse knob, then
with the fine focus knob.
5. Adjust the Diaphragm as you look through the Eyepiece, and you
will see that more detail is visible when you allow in less light! Too
much light will give the specimen a washed-out appearance.Try it
out!!
6. Use low power, then, without changing the focus knobs, switch it
to medium power. Move the slide until you are able to see clearly
through the lens.
7. Use the Medium and High Power remember that you
only use the fine focus knob!
8. Click the high power objective lens in position and only use the
fine adjustment knob to focus on specimen. At this point, if the
specimen is too light or too dark, try adjusting the diaphragm.
9 . Then, focus using the fine adjustment for sharp focusing. Do not
use the coarse adjustment
figure 4.4
2.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Construct a model of light microscope from locally available materials
in group of five students and submit it to your teacher.
Choose the best answer from the given alternatives
1. Of the followings lists choose the correct order in which light
passes through it.
A. mirror----objective------ lens----eyepiece --- lens
B. mirror-----slide-----------objective lens-----eye piece
C. Lens-------slide------------eyepiece lens-------objective lens
D. Eye piece-----objective lens----slide------mirror
2. Which parts of a microscope are combined to give magnified view
of specimen?
A. Light source and objective lens
B. eye piece and objective lens
C. Stages and eyepiece
D. eye piece and focus knob
3. To focus on specimen is the best to start with which objective  lens?
A. lower magnification          C. intermediate magnification
B. High magnification           D. Oil emersion
4. To which part of a microscope do you look through to see an object
magnified?
A. Eyepiece    B.  Stage  C. Focus knob   D. objective lens
5. Which One of the following is not the function of a microscope.
A. Magnifying the image of the sample.
B. Showing the details of the sample.
C. Enabling one to observe something seen with naked eye.
D. Enlarging the size of the sample.
11. Explain what change you have observed. Is the fine fiber compact or
relaxed? Draw it.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
• explain how cell was discovered;
• draw and label the basic structures and functions of a cell;
•  explain why cell shape and structure vary;
•  distinguish between unicellular and multicellular organisms;
• differentiate among cell, tissue, organ and organ system with
examples;
• examine the importance of cellular respiration and photosynthesis.
Introduction
In the previous section you have already learnt about a microscope;
the instrument that magnifies the images of an object. This enables
scientists to look at and study smaller things like cells which are not
seen by naked eye. In this sub unit, you will learn about the basic struc-
tural unit of life, which is the cell; cell may be compared to bricks.
Bricks are assembled to make a house, similarly cells assembled
to make the body of organism.
Word Roots and Origins
Word cell comes from the Latin “cellula” meaning a small room.
4.2.1	The	Discovery	and	the	Definition	of	Cell
Many biologists and other scientists contributed to the discovery of
cells. Among this the English scientists Robert Hooke (1665) was he
first to use the cell for he observed at very tiny slice of cork through
his microscope. He noticed that the cork was porous and comprised
of many tiny square boxes that remained him of the small rooms
in monastery. Hence, the word cell comes from the Latin cellula
meaning “a small room”.
4.2.    Cell
6. Magnification power of a microscope is related to its ability to:
A. increase the size of the image.
B. show the fine details of the sample.
C. resolve the image.
D. all of the above
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Soon after Robert Hooke discovered cells in cork, Anton van
Leeuwenhoek (1674)  made his own simple microscope with only
one lens. However, van Leeuwenhoek is very skilled at grinding
lenses and so his microscope can achieve magnifications of 300X.
He was the first person sees living, moving unicellular organisms
(Protista) in a drop of water. He calls the moving organisms
‘animalcules’. He also sees bacteria (from his teeth), which he also
calls ‘tiny animalcules’.
By the late 1830s, botanist Matthias Schleiden and zoologist
Theodor Schwann were studying tissues and proposed the unified
cell theory, which states that:
• all living things are composed of one or more cells,
• the cell is the basic unit of life, and
• all new cells arise from pre existing cells.
What is a cell?
Cells are the basic units of living organisms which are responsible to
carry out basic structural, functional, and biological unit of all known
organisms.
Cells are the building blocks of all living beings provide structure to
the body. Organisms may be made up of a single cell or many cells.
Cells are complex and their components perform various functions
in an organism. It comprises several cell organelles that perform
specialized functions to carry out life processes.
4.2.2. Structure of a cell
Cells are the tiny structural units of life, are made up of different parts.
The parts of cells are known as sub-cellular structures or organelles.
Different sub-cellular structures carry out different functions in cells.
When observed under compound or electron microscope, all cells
share four common components:
1) A plasma membrane, an outer covering that separates the cell’s
interior from its surrounding environment;
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure 4.5: Basic structure of animal and plant cell
2) Cytoplasm,  consisting of a jelly-like region within the cell in
which  other cellular components (organelles) are found
3) DNA,  the genetic material of the cell and
4) Ribosomes, particles that synthesize proteins.Animal and plant cells
share some common features like the cell membrane, nucleus and
cytoplasm.
There are several types of organelles within organism cell. The
sub cellular structures found in cells are cell wall, cell membrane,
mitochondria, plastids, ribosomes, nucleus, Golgi apparatus,
lysozyme, endoplasmic reticulum, vacuoles and others.  Organelles
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Structures and functions of organelles
Cell wall: The outer covering of cells that surrounds the cell membrane
in plant cell. The cell wall is a rigid covering that protects the cell.
1. Compare and contrast animal cell with plant cell?
2. What are the comen components of all cell?
Name of        Description      Function
part
Cytoplasm    jelly-like, with
particles and
organelles in
cell
membrane
nucleus
cell wall
Vacuole a fluid-filled space
surrounded by a
membrane
Chloroplast an organelle containing
chlorophyll
contains the cell organelles,
e.g. mitochondria, nucleus,
site of chemical reactions
a partially permeable
layer that forms a
boundary around the
cytoplasm
prevents cell contents
from escaping
controls what substances
enter and leave the cell
a circular or oval
structure containing
DNA (genetic material)
controls cell activities
controls cell division
controls cell development
a tough, non-living
layer made of cellulose
surrounding the cell
membrane
prevents plant cells from
bursting allows water and
salts to pass through
(freely permeable)
contains salts and sugars
helps to keep plant cells
firm
• Site of photosynthesis
• traps light energy for
photosynthesis
Table 4.2 summary of the common and difference parts of animal and
plant cell
Animal and
plant cell    Plant cells only
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Cell membrane:  Is the outermost covering of the cell that separates
the content of the cell from its external environment. It Controls
materials that get in and out of the cell.
Nucleus:  controls all activities of the cell.
Cytoplasm: it contains different sub-cellular structures in which
chemical processes take place. The part of the cytoplasm that does
not contain any organelles is referred to as the cytosol.
Mitochondrion: Known as the powerhouse of the cell, the
mitochondrion (plural: mitochondria) is the double-membrane
organelle where the process of cellular respiration takes place.
Chloroplast:Specific/unique to plant cells, chloroplasts are double-
membrane organelles and serve as site of photosynthesis.
Ribosome: Ribosomes are the sites where protein synthesis occurs.
Because protein synthesis is essential for all cells, ribosomes are
found in almost in every cell,
Endoplasmic Reticulum: is a series of interconnected membranous
tubules that collectively modify proteins and synthesize lipids.
Most cells contain two types of endoplasmic reticulum: the rough
and the smooth. The rough endoplasmic reticulum  (RER) is
so named because the ribosomes attached to its cytoplasmic sur -
face give it a studded appearance when viewed.  Protein molecules
undergo modifications such as folding or addition of sugars.
The smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) is continuous with the
RER but has few or no ribosomes on its cytoplasmic surface.
The SER’s functions include synthesis of carbohydrates, lipids
(including phospholipids), and steroid hormones; detoxification
of medications and poisons; alcohol metabolism; and storage of
calcium ion.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
4.2.3.  Cell Shape and Size
The Golgi apparatus is a series of flattened membranous sacs. The
sorting, tagging, packaging, and distribution of lipids and proteins
take place in the Golgi apparatus (also called the Golgi body).
Lysosomes
In animal cells, the lysosomes are the cell’s “garbage disposal.”
Digestive enzymes within the lysosomes aid the breakdown of
proteins,polysaccharides, lipids, nucleic acids, and even worn-out
oranelles. In single-celled organism lysosomes are important for
digestion of the food they ingest and the recycling of organelles.
Vesicles and Vacuoles
Vesicles and vacuoles are membrane-bound sacs that function as
storage and transport materials. The central vacuole in plant cell plays
a key role in regulating the cell’s concentration of water in changing
environmental conditions.
Peroxisomes
are small, round organelles enclosed by single membranes. They carry
out oxidation reactions that break down fatty acids and amino acids.
They also detoxify many poisons that may enter the body. Alcohol
is detoxified by peroxisomes in liver cells.
Different cells have different shapes and their unique morphologies
are directly related to their function:
•    Plant cells, in general, have rectangular, rigid walls, and distinct
edges. Such structure is contributed by the presence of cell   wall
that forces the cell to have a definite shape.
•   Unlike plant cells, animal cells tend to have more irregular body
shapes due to the absence of cell wall in their overall structure.
•     Microorganisms like bacteria have three types of cell shape: oval
(cocci), rod-shaped (bacilli), spiral, star-shaped, and rectangular.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure: 4.6 the shapes and sizes of different cell
Like shapes, the size of cells is also linked to their functions.
Depending on the type of organism, the size of the cell greatly varies.
•   In particular, egg cells are the largest cells that an organism has.
This is very much related to their function as the development
of the zygote after fertilization requires huge amounts of energy.
Approximately, the human egg cell measures 0.12 mm in diameter.
•       On the other hand, the smallest cell is that of the parasitic bacterium
Mycoplasma gallicepticum. This bacterium, which thrives in
the bladder, respiratory and reproductive tracts of mammals. This
cell has an average diameter of 0.0001 mm
4.2.4 Unicellular Organisms
What is a unicellular organism?
A cell is the basic unit of life. All living organisms are composed of
one (unicellular) or more (multicellular) cells.
Unicellular organisms are those organisms composed of one cell.
They are typically microscopic in nature and cannot be seen with
naked eyes.Life processes such as excretion, digestion, feeding
and reproduction occur in one cell. Examples of unicellular
organisms include different bacteria, most algae, unicellular
fungi (yeast) and protozoans such as, amoeba and paramecium
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Experiment 4.2
Examining different water samples and prepared slides for the presence
of organisms In the first part of this activity, you will examine prepared
slides of unicellular organisms under a compound microscope. in
the second part of this activity; you will prepare a wet mount of
amoeba culture.
Materials you will require:Hand lens,Water samples from pond, river,
lake, well or standing water, Compound light microscope, Prepared
Procedures:
I Observation using a hand lens
1.  Collect water samples in open mouth container (beakers).
2.  Observe the surface of each sample with a hand lens for the
presence of living organisms.
3.  Can you observe anything moving? Please, draw it.
II Observation of prepared slides
1.Place a prepared slide of amoeba on the stage of the microscope.
1. With your microscope on low power, observe the slide.
2. Move the slide around on the stage until you find some cells.
3. Now, using the medium- or high-power objective lens, focus
on one cell and observe and draw what you see.
4. Label all visible structures.
5. Repeat steps 1- 5 for prepared slides of Paramecium, euglena,
yeast and bacteria.
6. For each organism you view, be sure to include the name of
the organism and the total magnification used.
After completing these practical activities, compare your drawings
with the figures given on; figure 4.7
Figure: 4.7 some unicellular organisms
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
4.2.5 Multicellular organisms:
are organisms that are made of up many cells. Plants and animals are
examples of multi cellular organism. In multi cellular organism
cell are specialize to perform different functions.Human being are
multicellular organism consist  different types of cell like  blood
cells, skin cells, brain cells, heart cells and many types of other cells.
Similarly plants have different cell like stem Cells, root cells, and
many other types.
Figure: 4.8 some different types of cells that build up human body
Cells are the basic building blocks of living things. The human body is
composed of trillions of cells, all with their own specialized function.
4.2.6  Levels of Organization of Living Things
Cell, tissue, organ, organ system, organisms
1. Cell: All living things are made of cells; the cell itself is the
smallest important unit of structure and function in living organisms
it performs various metabolic functions like providing structure and
rigidity to the body, converting food into nutrients and energy, and
others.
Regardless of their small size, cells are organized in a precise manner.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
At cellular level, organisms can be classified into two: single-celled
organisms (unicellular) and multiple-celled organisms (multi-cellular)
2. Tissue: In most multicellular organisms, cells combine to make
tissues, which are groups of similar cells carrying out the same
function. For example, muscle tissue, connective tissue, and nervous
tissue.  Like cells, tissues perform metabolic processes that keep the
organism alive.
3. Organs:  are collections of tissues grouped together based on a
common function. Organs are present not only in animals but also in
plants.In plants, their organs include the flowers, roots, stems, and the
leaves. On the other hand, organs of animals include the brain, heart,
stomach, eyes, and many more
Figure: 4.9 Level of organization in human being
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Choose the best answer for each of the following questions.
1.  Which one of the following is true about cells?
A. Cells are generally too small to be seen with the naked eye.
B. Cells are the structural and functional units of all life forms.
C. Cells are the smallest units that carry out all process of life.
D.  All of the above
2. Which one of the following is part of a cell and only found in
animal cell?
A.  Cell membrane
B.  Chloroplast
C.  Cell wall
D.  Lysosome
4. Organ system:  is a higher level of organization that consists of
functionally related (associated) organs. While each organ system in
an organism works as a distinct entity, they all function in cooperation
with each other in order to help keep the organism alive. In plants,
organ systems include the root and shoot system, while animal organ
systems include the digestive system, nervous system circulatory
system, and others.
5. An organism can be simply defined as any living thing that
is composed of various organ systems that function altogether.
Organisms are individual living bodies.
3. Which one of the followings is a unicellular organism?
A. amoeba    B. yeast      C. bacteria D. Paramecium   E. all
4. Which one the following is not an organ?
A. heart        B. lung       C. nerve     D. stomach
5. Which one is formed from groups of similar cells carrying out the
same function?
A. Organ       B. tissue     C. organ system   D. Organism
4.2.7  Respiration and Mitochondria.
• How is the energy in food we eat released to our body?
• What is the role of oxygen that we inhale during breathing
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Respiration is the process in which both plants and animals break
down simple sugars into carbon dioxide and water and release energy
in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The ATP is used for all
the processes that occur within a cell that need energy.
Cellular respiration occurs in the mitochondria of all organisms.
Mitochondria (singular, mitochondrion) are often called the
“powerhouses” or “energy factories” of a cell because they are
responsible for making adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the cell’s main
energy-carrying molecule. Mitochondria are oval-shaped, double-
membrane organelles. Each membrane is a phospholipid bilayer
embedded with proteins. The inner layer has folds called cristae, which
increase the surface area of the inner membrane. The area surrounded
by the folds is called the mitochondrial matrix. The cristae and the
matrix have different roles in cellular respiration.
The formation of ATP from the breakdown of glucose is known as
cellular respiration and occurs in two ways, aerobic respiration
and anaerobic respiration.
Aerobic Respiration
Cellular respiration or aerobic respiration is a series of chemical
reactions which begin with the reactants of sugar in the presence of
oxygen to produce energy, carbon dioxide and water as waste products.
Cellular respiration has four stages
1. Glycolysis.
2. Oxidation of pyruvates  or Link reaction
3. Tricarboxylic Acid (TCA)  or Citric Acid cycle
4. Electron transport chain (ETC) and chemiosmosis
In total, the resulting product of aerobic cellular respiration from a
single glucose molecule can be up to 38 ATP.
C6H12O6 + 6 O2 → 6 CO2 + 6 H2O + 38ATP
(Glucose + 6 Oxygen → 6 Carbon Dioxide + 6 Water + 38ATP)
What is the role of Oxygen in cellular respiration?
Oxygen is an essential molecule in cellular respiration. Basically,
oxygen can be found at the end of the ETC (during aerobic
respiration) where it accepts electrons while picking up protons in
order to produce water molecules.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Because of this, oxygen is also called as the “final electron acceptor”
/ Oxidizing agent. When oxygen levels are depleted, electrons will
be simply dispersed and the electron transport chain will discontinue.
Anaerobic Respiration: Respiration in animal cells can take place
anaerobically (without oxygen), to transfer energy; it simply involves
the incomplete breakdown of glucose into lactic acid. This occurs
when the body can’t supply enough oxygen for aerobic respiration,
such as during vigorous exercise
• In animal cells, this process is called the lactic acid fermentation.
It can be simplified in the following equation:
C6H12O6 → 2 CH3CH (OH) COOH + 2 CO2 + 2 ATP
Glucose → lactic acid + carbon dioxides+ 2ATP
• On the other hand, microorganisms like yeast respire without
oxygen produce ethanol and carbon dioxide. Such process is referred
to as the ethanol or alcohol fermentation.
C6H12O6 → 2 C2H5OH + 2 CO2 + 2 ATP
Glucose→ Ethanol + carbon dioxides + 2ATP
In both types of fermentation process, only 2 ATP are produced from
a glucose molecule
4.2.8 Photosynthesis and chloroplast
Plants make sugar by using energy from sunlight to change carbon
dioxide (CO 2), a gas absorbed from the air, and water (H 20) taken
from the ground by roots into glucose (C 6H12O6) and oxygen (O 2).
This process is called photosynthesis and occurs in the chloroplast
of the plant cell.
Chloroplasts have outer and inner membranes, within the space
enclosed by a chloroplast’s inner membrane; is a set of interconnected
and stacked, fluid-filled membrane sacs called thylakoids. Each stack
of thylakoids is called a granum (plural grana). The fluid enclosed by
the inner membrane and surrounding the grana is called the stroma.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
1. Compare the functions of the mitochondrion and chloroplast. How
are they similar?
2. Write the chemical equations of cellular respiration and
photosynthesis
3. Cmpare anaerobic and  aerobic respiration?
The chloroplasts contain a green pigment called chlorophyll, which
captures the energy of sunlight for photosynthesis.
Photosynthesis is a series of chemical reactions that convert carbon
dioxide and water into glucose (sugar) and oxygen in the presence of
sunlight.
Carbon dioxide + Water
Glucose (sugar) + Oxygen+ Water
6CO2 + 12H2O      C6H12 O6+6O2+6H2O
Importance of photosynthesis and respiration
The process of photosynthesis plays important roles. Photosynthesis
converts radiant or solar energy into chemical energy. It provides
oxygen in atmosphere for all living organism to perform cellular
respiration. It maintains the balanced level of oxygen and carbon
dioxide ecosystem.
Figure 9.10 the relationship between respiration and respiration
On the other hand carbon dioxide produced by organism from
cellular respiration would be used during photosynthesis. The
following diagram illustrates the important relationship between
cellular respiration and photosynthesis.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Unit Summary
• A microscope is an instrument that is used to observe objects can
not clearly with the naked eye.
• Microscopes are grouped in different type According to the type of
radiation they use for observation or image formation. The most
common are light and electron microscope.
• The light microscope uses a beam light to form the image of an
object, while the electron microscope uses the beam of electron to
form the image.
• A simple microscope consists of a single convex lens that is capable
of magnifying an object.
• Compound microscope is a microscope that uses too lens systems
at the same time.
• Microscope has two major abilities these magnification and
resolution
• Magnification is increasing the size of an object to be viewed.
• Resolution is ability of the microscope to show the detailed or the
scattered part of an object.
• Mounting is the process preparing a specimen for observation under
a microscope.
• A cell is the smallest unit of a living thing. Thus, cells are the basic b
uilding blocks of all organisms.
• All cells commonly have cell membrane, cytoplasm,  nucleus or
DNA and ribosome
• Unicellular organisms are those organisms that are made up of
single cell.
• Multicellular organisms are those organisms that are made up of
many cells.
• Multicellular organisms have different levels of organization like
cell, tissue, organ, organ system, and organisms.
• Mitochondria and chloroplast are double membrane organelles
perform cellular respiration and Photosynthesis respectively.
• The formation of ATP (energy) from the breakdown of glucose using
oxygen is known as cellular respiration.
• Photosynthesis is food making process in green plants using CO2,
water, chlorophyll pigments and light from the sun in chloroplast.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Part I, Choose the correct answer from a given alternative options.
1. The ___________ is the basic unit of life.
A.  Organism       B. cell         C. tissue     D. organ
2. Which of these structures do all cell share?
A.  nuclear envelope           C.  organelles
B.  cell walls                       D.  plasma membrane
3.  which of the following scientists discover the  cell
A. Robert Hooke              B. Anton van Leeuwenhoek
C. Zaccharias Janssen      D. Hans Lipperhey
4.  Which of the following feature will help you in distinguishing a
plant cell from an animal cell?
A. cell wall                       C. mitochondria
B. Cell membrane            D. nucleus
5.  Which part of the cell contains organelles?
A. cytoplasm      B. Cytosol   C. Cell wall        D. nucleus
6.  The shape and size of the cell are directly related to:
A. The size of organism     B. their functions
C. environment                  D. all
7.  Which of the following levels of biological organization shows
the correct order from simplest to complex level?
A. Organism ------ organ system ------ organ ------ tissue ------ cell
B. Tissue ------ cell ------ organ ------ organ system ------ organism
C. Cell ------ tissue ------ organ ------ organism ------ organ syste
D. Cell ------ tissue ------ organ ------ organ system ------ organism
8. Which organelles are responsible for digesting cell waste and
foreign bacteria?
A. Golgi apparatus
B. Cytoskeleton
C. Nucleus
D. Lysosomes
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
9. Which of these organelles modifies cell products and then packages
them for distribution?
A.  The nucleus                    C.  The mitochondrion
B.  The cell membrane         D. The Golgi apparatus
10.  The ‘powerhouse’ of the cell that generates the cell’s energy-rich ATP
molecules is the:
A. Mitochondrion                C. Chloroplast
B. Smooth ER                     D. Nucleus
Part II: Match items given in column ‘B’ with items given in
column‘A’
‘‘A’’                                                            ‘‘B’’
1. Cell wall                       A. sorting, tagging and distribution of lipids
2. Nucleus                        B. provides support, and gives shape to the cell
3. Ribosome                     C. it direct and control cell activities
4. Mitochondria                D modify proteins and synthesize lipids
5. Chloroplast                    E. the power house of cell
6. Golgi apparatus              F. the site were photosynthesis occur
7. Endoplasmic reticulum  G. Synthesize protein
Part III: Fill in the blank spaces with correct answer.
1. The instrument used to observe cells is ________
2. The ability of the microscope that makes the specimen appear large
is known as-----------------
3. The objective lenses of a compound microscope are------ ,---- ,-----
and-----
4.------------- is preparing a specimen for observation under a microscope
Part IV: Give short answers for the following questions.
1. Cells consist of many organelles, yet we do not call any of these
organelles as structural and functional unit of living organisms why?
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
2. Explain how do you calculate the total magnification of your
specimen when using a compound light microscope.
3. Reorder the following parts of living things from the largest to  the
smallest (Cell, organ, organism, tissue, organ, system, organelle).
4. Write the difference between magnification and resolution.
5. The figure 4.10 given below is the structural organization of the
animal cell. Indicate the organelles that is indicated by each number.
figure 4.10
Microscope           Resolution       Unicellular     Lens
Magnification Mounting       Multicellular     Cell
Monocular           Binocular       Cellula               Tissue
Respiration           Photosynthesis   Anaerobic     Aerobic
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Unit 5  LIVING THINGS AND THEIR DIVERSITY
At the end of this unit, you will able to:
•  distinguish between living and non-living things by describing
the features that characterize living organisms;
• discuss if movement i.e. locomotion can characterize all living
things or not;
•  define classification and its purpose;
•  explain the purpose of scientific name;
•  list down the hierarchical levels in the classification
of organisms;
•  describe the distinguishing characteristics of kingdom
animalia, Plantae, Protista, Monera and Fungi;
•  list common examples of animals, Plantae, Protista,
Monera and Fungi;
•  describe the body plan of a common animals, Plantae,
Protista, Monera and Fungi;
•  describe habitats of animals, Plantae, Protista, Monera
and Fungi.
5.1. Living Things
5.2. Kingdoms of Life
• What makes living things  different from non-living things?
Consider as an example butterfly and stone.
5.1.1.  Characteristics of Living Things
There are at least five million different kinds of living things in the
world. These organisms are classified according to their similarities
and differences. The need for classifying living things is to identify
them and to study their relationship, their origin and development
and to understand how life originated.
If you observe your environment you realize that there are millions
of different organisms living on the Earth, including animals, plants
and microorganism. In this unit you are going to learn about the
characteristics of life, naming and how to classify those organisms
in to different group.
5.1. Living Things
At the end of this section you will be able to:
• differentiate between living and non-living things;
• organize and describe characteristics of living things;
• justify why movement or locomotion from one place to another
cannot be a defining characteristic of all organisms;
• relate diversity with classification of organisms;
• justify why scientific names of organisms should be used in science
than the local names;
• analyze and describe the relationships of the hierarchical levels
(Kingdom to Species) in the classification of organisms.
Introduction
Living things belong to any organism or a life form that possesses
or shows the characteristics of life or being alive.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
However, a living thing possesses certain properties that help define
what life is. All groups of living organisms share several key
characteristics or functions: movements, respiration, sensitivity,
growth, reproduction and excretion.  When viewed together, these
seven characteristics serve to define life.
• Movement: An action by an organism or part of an organism
causing a change of position or place. Most single-celled creatures
and animals move about as a whole. Fungi and plants may make
movements with parts of their bodies.
•  Respiration: The chemical reactions that break down nutrient
molecules in living cells to release energy for metabolism
•   Sensitivity: The ability to detect or sense stimuli in the internal or
external environment and to make appropriate responses. Organisms
can respond to diverse stimuli. For example, plants can grow toward
a source of light, climb on fences and walls, or respond to touch. Even
tiny bacteria can move toward or away from chemicals or light.
• Growth: A permanent increase in size and dry mass by an increase
in cell number or cell size or both. Non- living organisms grow by
addition of new material to the out sides surface, however living
organism grow from within using food
• Reproduction: All living organisms must have the ability to
reproduce. Living things make more organisms like themselves.
Whether the organism is a rabbit, or a tree, or a bacterium, life will
create more life. Reproduction is the process of making the next
generation and may be a sexual or an asexual process.
• Excretion: The removal from organisms of toxic materials, the waste
products of metabolism (chemical reactions in cells including
respiration) and substances in excess of requirements Example the
process of respiration produces west product, carbon dioxides, which
can be harmful in excess and must be removed
1. Are plants categorized in living things or nonliving things? Justify
why?
2.Why movement or locomotion from one place to other cannot be
taken as defining characteristics of all living things?
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
• Nutrition: the taking in of materials for energy, growth and
development; plants require light, carbon dioxide, water and ions;
animals need organic compounds, ions and usually need water
1. List and explain the characteristics of life.
2. Explain why movement or locomotion from one place to
another cannot be a defining characteristic of all organisms?
5.1.2.	Classification	ond	Scientific	Names	of	Organisms
Scientists have found and describe approximately1.75million species,
moreover new species are being discovered every day. With such
diversity of life on the earth how does one go about making sense of
it all? One ways to make sense of it is by classification. Classification
is an important step in understanding the present diversity and past
evolutionary history of life on Earth. It helps make sense of the over
whelming diversity of living things.
What	is	classification?
Classification is sorting or grouping things together on the basis
common features /defined characteristic or criteria.
The science of classification is called taxonomy. Classification is
usually a hierarchical process. One begins with general and broad
differences, and then one systematically introduces more and more
detailed and specific criteria.
Why do we classify organisms?
Biologist/ taxonomist classify living things because of:
•  To identify those most at risk of extinction and to understand
common ancestors.
•   It helps scientists to sort organisms in order and to make easy
for study.
•  It helps them to identify new organisms by finding out which
group they fit.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Taxonomy has two branches: the naming of organism or
nomenclature and Placing of organism in to group, or systematic
which is done on the basis of their similarities and differences.
There are two ways of classifying organisms. These are artificial and
natural.
The	artificial	classification based on one or a few easily observed
characteristics and usually designed for practical purpose with an
emphasis on convenience and simplicity.
Example:  You could put all the animals that fly in the same group.
This group would then include birds, bats and many insects. You
could put all animals that live in water and have streamlined, fish-
like bodies in the same group. This group would then include fish and
whales. They based on arbitrary groupings and have little meaning.
Natural	or	biological	classification system tries to use natural
relationships between organisms it consider more evidence than
artificial classifications including internal as well as external\
features. It  is a scientific method  of  classification that groups organisms
that share common features.This classification is not random, but
rather it describes evolutionary relationships. As a consequence,
it is always necessarily hierarchical, where the important features
inherited from a common ancestor determine the group in which
the organisms are placed. For example, humans and whales both
feed their young on milk, which is a characteristic inherited from a
common ancestor. This similarity places them under the same class,
mammals, even though their habitats are completely different.Each
organism is grouped into one of five large groups or
kingdoms, which are subdivided into smaller groups called phyla
(singular: phylum) and then smaller and smaller groups with other
names.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
The smallest natural group of organisms is the species. A species can
be defined as a group of organisms that can reproduce to produce fertile
offspring.
Scientific	Naming	of	Organism
The Binomial System
Organisms were first classified by a Swedish naturalist called Carl
Linnaeus (1707 to 1778) in a way that allows the subdivision of living
organisms into smaller and more specialized groups.  He designed a
scientific system of naming organisms called binomial nomenclature.
The binomial system of naming species is an internationally agreed
system in which the scientific name of an organism is made up of two
parts showing the genus and the species. Binomial means ‘two names’;
the first name gives the genus and the second gives the species. Carl
Linnaeus named organisms in Latin using the binomial system.
The scientific naming or binomials naming system should follow the
following rules
• Should contain two names (first and the second)
• The first name is the name of the genus name to which group the
organisms belongs and it should begin in capital letter
• The second name is the name of species to which the organism
belongs.it is written in small letter.
Taxonomy: the science of classifying and naming organisms.
Classification: sorting things based on defined characteristics or
criteria
Nomenclature: naming of organism
Genera: a group of closely related species.
Species: is the group of organism that can reproduce to produce fertile
offspring
Binomial system is an internationally agreed system in which the
scientific name of an organism is made up of two parts showing the
genus and the species.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
• The scientific name must always be either written underlined or
printed in italics.
The scientific name of our human race is Homo sapiens / Homo sapiens,
similarly the scientific name of some organism listed below in the table
No	 Common	name	 																								Scientific	name
1 African elephant                         Loxodonta africana
2 Lion                                             Panthera leo
3 Teff                                             Eragrostis tef
4 Domestic cat                        Felis catus
The activity below is not Life Sciences related, but expresses the
process of classification. Discuss in group and present the result
of your discussion   the relationships among the administrative
structure: Country, Region, Zone, Wereda and correlates with
biological levels of classification
An organism will always have only one scientific name even though
they might have more than one common name. Before Linnaeus, the
use of common names to refer to organisms caused confusion because
there were regional differences in these common names. Because of
the scientific names is international agreed and universal it avoids the
confusion of local variation in common names. For instance, every
biologist will understand that Felis catus means ‘house cat’ without
resorting to the dictionary, no matter what language they speak.
1. Explain the importance of scientific naming organisms.
2. Define what is species?
Table 5.1
Below Table 5.1
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Activity: 5.4  Make you own mnemonic to remember the sequence
of the classification system This activity allows the learners to be
creative. Give the learners the freedom to choose which platform
suits them best. The learners have fun and learn the classification
system at the same time.
When trying to identify animals, it is this hierarchy or ranking scheme
that we follow. We start by identifying the kingdom, to which an
organism belongs, then its phylum, class, family, order, and so on.
As you go through the classification hierarchy, you will see that
scientists have used broader features to put organisms into kingdoms,
which are the largest groups of organisms. When you move down
towards the species, which are the smallest groups of organisms,
features are becoming specific. In other words, two organisms that
belong to the same species share more features than those in the same
kingdom but in different species.
Figure 5.1: Diagram showing hierarchy of classification
5.1.3.	Hierarchy	in	the	Classification	of	Organisms
(Kingdom to Species)
Linnaeus eventually extends the binomial system to include more
groups than just genus and species. He arranged in hierarchy with
largest group, the kingdom at the top of hierarchy, the groups he
proposed are still used today and, in descending order of size: The
sequence of classification is: Kingdom, Phylum, Class, Order,
Family, Genus, and Species
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Instructions: Make an easy to remember  memory aid to remember
the sequence of levels of the classification system.
Materials: pen, paper, imagination!
Procedure: coin mnemonics using first letters of the levels such as-K
for Kingdom, -P for Phylum, etc. for frequent memorization easy
and of the levels. Example of such mnemonic as: King Philip came
over for Good Spaghetti (KPCOFGS) rehearse this mnemonic at the
beginning of your class  until thisunit is completed.
KEY WORD
Kingdom: are grouped of related phyla or divisions
Phylum or Division: a group of related classes
Class: a group of related orders
Order: a group of related families
Genus: a group of closely related species.
Family: a group of related genera
Species: basic unit of classification or taxonomy
Table5.2 The taxonomic breakdown of a few familiar animals and plant
1. Write the classification hierarchy for human being from kingdom
to species.
Taxon        Dog                     Tiger           Maize
Kingdom        Animalia          Animalia Plantae
Phylum        Chordata          Chorodata Magnoliophyta
Class                  Mamalia          Mammalia Liliopsida
Order                  Carnivora          Carnivora Poales
Family        Canidae                     Felidea Poaceae
Genus                 Canis                     Felis           Zea
Species        Familiaris          Tigris           Mays
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
A species can be defined as a group of organisms withsimilar features
and these organisms are capable of breeding and produce fertile
offspring.You are probably aware of the fact that horses and donkeys
belong to the same kingdom, phylum, class, order, family as well as
genus but they are from different species. Therefore, if a donkey and
the horse happen to breed, they produce an offspring called a mule.
The mule is infertile, meaning that it cannot reproduce offspring
because it is a product of organisms of different species.Classification
hierarchy has many uses. First, it helps scientists to sort organisms in
order. Second, it helps them to identify new organisms by finding out
which group they fit. Third, it makes easier to study organisms when
they are sorted in groups.
Exercises 5.4
I. Choose the best answer from a given alternative options
1.The Swedish scientist who create the binomial naming system
was________
A. Robert Hook                       B. Carlous   Linnaeus
C. Robert H. Whittaker           D, Charles Darwin
2.Which of the following in the classification system is the smallest?
A. Kingdom    B. species    C. Genus   D. class
3. Excretion, irritability and reproduction are characteristics of:
A.  all animals and plants   B. animals only
C.  plants only                      D. some animals and some plants only
Figure: 5 .2 below shows how fish react when the glass on one side of
an aquarium tank is tapped with a finger.
4. What characteristics of living organisms does this demonstrate?
A. Excretion and movement       B. excretion and nutrition
C.  growth and irritability           D. irritability and movement
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
5. The scientific name of human being is Homo sapiens, the second
parts of the scientific name represent-------
A. genera name                B. kingdom name
C. species named             D. family name
II. Complete the blank space below by choosing the words
from list
List: excretion, growth, Sensitivity, movement, nutrition, organisms,
reproduction, respiration
A. Living things are often called ______________.
B.  All living things release energy from their food in a process called
______________, which happens inside their cells
C. Some of the energy is used for ________________, which usually
happens more quickly in animals than in plants.
D. The food from which the energy is released is taken into the body
in a process called ________________.
E. All living things get bigger as they get older. This process is called
_____
F. The production of young is called ____________________.
G. Waste substances are removed from organisms by the process of
_______
H. The seventh characteristic shown by all living organisms is
____________________, which means that they are sensitive to
things around them.
5.2.  The Kingdom of Life
At the end of this section you  will be able to:
• compare the five Kingdoms of living things by describing their
distinguishing characteristics;
• summarize the commonest examples of organisms belonging to
each Kingdom;
• describe the body plans of insects such as butterfly, amphibians
such as frogs, mosses, liverworts, ferns, conifers such as junipers;
• Junipers, flowering plants;
• relate each Kingdom of organisms to their major habitat types as
aquatic, terrestrial or moist.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Activity: 5. 6 Brain storming
i. Have you ever thought of multitudes of life forms that surround us
and can you list some of them?
ii. Make groups of five, and then categorize the following organisms
given in the following charts into some named group and present
the results of your discussion for the class.
The five kingdom system is the most common way of grouping
living things based on simple distinctive characteristics. The
five-kingdom system was developed by Robert H. Whittaker in 1969
and was built on the work of previous biologists such as Carolus
Linnaeus. Living things can be classified into five major kingdoms:
• Kingdom Animalia
• Kingdom Plantae
• Kingdom Fungi
• Kingdom Protista
• Kingdom Monera (Bacteria)
Figure: 5.3 Some diversity of life on planet earth
Activity5. 7
Categorize the organism listed in figure 5.3 above based on the five
kingdom of life and explain your reason to classify under any of the
kingdom?
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
5.2.1. Kingdom Animalia
Major characteristics of animals
Members of the animal kingdom are eukaryotic and multicellular
but have no cell wall or photosynthetic pigments. They are mostly
motile and they are heterotrophic, which means they must feed on
other organisms and cannot make their own food. They reproduce
sexually or asexually. Animals store carbon as glycogen and fat.
Major groups of animal and their habitats
1. Invertebrates - lack back bones
Insects (Arthropods)
The insects form a very large class of arthropods. Insects live in every
possible environment on Earth and are among the most highly adapted
of all animal species
Bees, butterflies, mosquitoes, houseflies, earwigs, greenfly and beetles
are just a few of the subgroups in this class. Insects have segmented
bodies with a firm exoskeleton, three pairs of jointed legs, compound
eyes and, typically, two pairs of wings. The body is divided into three
parts:  head, thorax and abdomen regions. Insects have only one
pair of antennae and only three pairs of legs and have no limbs on
the abdominal segment. They reproduce sexualy having complet or
incomplet metamorphosis.
Figure: 5.4 the body structure of insect
Antenna
Head
Thorax
Abdomen
Leg
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Worms: Worms are members of several invertebrate phyla, animals
that typically have a long cylindrical tube-like, flattened, or leaf like
shaped body, no limbs, no eyes and have hydro skeleton.  It includes
Platyhelminthes (flatworms), Annelida (segmented worms), Nemertea
(ribbon worms), nematode (roundworms, pinworms) etc. They vary in
size from less than 1 mm (0.04 inch) in certain nematodes to more than
30 m (100) They live in marine, freshwater, and terrestrial habitats.
Some types of worms are parasitic, others are free-living.
Figure: 5.5 different worms of phylum Annelida
KEY TERMS
Heterotrophs: heterotrophs are organisms that cannot produce their own
food.
hydroskeleton: is flexable skeleton supported by fluid pressure.
Metamorphosis: is a process by which animals undergo extreme, rapid
physical changes sometime after birth.
Exoskeleton: is the external skeleton that supports and protects an animal’s
body.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Collecting and examining flatworms and insects
Materials you require: A. containers, nets, hand lenses, alcohol solution
Procedure: 1.You may need to use nets to catch some of the organisms. Take care
handling any organisms which may sting or bite.   Keep different types of specimen
you collected (bu tterfly, grasshopper, spider, Bees, mosquitoes) in appropriate
container and examine as the following
2. What features the specimens have in common?
3. Examine their characteristic features, i.e. number of limbs, presence and number of
antennae and number of body parts, presence and number of wings.
4. You should then make a table of characteristic features like in the following tables
5. Make large well-labeled drawings of each of their specimens
Specimen Number of body
parts
Number of limbs Antenna wings
Butterfly
Grasshopper
B. Looking at Platyhelminthes (flatworms)
Material used: preserved or fresh specimens of Platyhelminthes (flat worm) hand
lenses. Observe, draw and label specimens of these invertebrate phyla
Activity: 5. 9 collecting and examining amphibian (frog)
Material you require: transparent container or cage, pairs of forceps, pairs of gloves.
Procedure: 1.Collect live or freshly killed toads or frogs keep in transparent container
or cage.
2. Examine the head and trunk regions of the toad. You should note and identify the
following characteristic features: Mouth, Nostrils, Eyes Ear, Trunk, limbs.
3. Does the toad/frog have a tail?
Activity: 5.8
Collecting	and	examining	flatworms	and	insects
Materials you require:
A. containers, nets, hand lenses, alcohol solution
Procedure:
1.You may need to use nets to catch some of the organisms. Take
care handling any organisms which may sting or bite.  Keep different
types of specimen you collected (butterfly, grasshopper, spider, Bees,
mosquitoes) in appropriate container and examine as the following
2. What features the specimens have in common?
3. Examine their characteristic features, i.e. number of limbs, pres-
ence and number of antennae and number of body parts, presence
and number of wings.
4. You should then make a table of characteristic features like in the
following tables
5. Make large well-labeled drawings of each of their specimens
B. Looking at Platyhelminthes (flatworms)
Material used: preserved or fresh specimens of Platyhelminthes (flat
worm) hand lenses. Observe, draw and label specimens of these
invertebrate phyla
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
4. Make a large well-labelled drawing of the toad/frog as seen from the slide
Vertebrates (fish, amphibi an, reptiles, birds & mammals) . Vertebrates are animals
which have a vertebral column. The vertebral column is sometimes called the spinal
column consists of a chain of cylindrical bones (vertebrae) joined end to end.
Table 5.3 major groups of animals and their characteristics
Class  Main features Examples
FISH
 Poikilothermic (cold blooded) vertebrates.
 Many of them have a smooth, wet scales
on skin, streamlined shape
 Breath by gills, reproduce sexually
fertilization external
 Fins (also used for balance)
 Live only in water (aquatic environment)
AMPHIBIAN
 Poikilothermic (cold blooded)
 Have moist skins with a good supply of
Capillaries
 Have lungs and skin for breathing
 Fertilization external, produce jelly -
covered eggs in water
 Four limbs, back feet are o ften webbed to
make swimming more efficient
 Live both in water and on land.
REPTILES
 Poikilothermic (cold blooded)
 dry skin, with scales
 four legs (apart from snakes)
 produce eggs with a rubbery, waterproof
shell; laid on land
 Have lungs for breathing
 Most reptiles live in warm habitats
BIRDS
 are homoeothermic (warm blooded
 feathers, with scales on legs
 two wings and two legs
 produce eggs with a
 hard shell, laid on land
 lungs for breathing; beak
 live in water and on land
MAMMALS
 are homoeothermic (warm blooded)
 produce live young
 lungs for breathing
 females have mammary glands to
produce milk to feed young;
 four types of teeth
 live on land
Key word
Poikilothermic: is an animal whose internal temperature varies
considerably.
Homoeothermic: organisms able to maintain a constant internal
body temperature.
and streamlined shape
and fertilization is external
Example   - star fish      - whales
- jelly fish
Example   - froge, toads
FISHAMPHIBIANREPTILES
Example    - corocodiles
- snakes
- lizards
-turtles
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
4. Make a large well-labelled drawing of the toad/frog as seen from the slide
Vertebrates (fish, amphibi an, reptiles, birds & mammals) . Vertebrates are animals
which have a vertebral column. The vertebral column is sometimes called the spinal
column consists of a chain of cylindrical bones (vertebrae) joined end to end.
Table 5.3 major groups of animals and their characteristics
Class  Main features Examples
FISH
 Poikilothermic (cold blooded) vertebrates.
 Many of them have a smooth, wet scales
on skin, streamlined shape
 Breath by gills, reproduce sexually
fertilization external
 Fins (also used for balance)
 Live only in water (aquatic environment)
AMPHIBIAN
 Poikilothermic (cold blooded)
 Have moist skins with a good supply of
Capillaries
 Have lungs and skin for breathing
 Fertilization external, produce jelly -
covered eggs in water
 Four limbs, back feet are o ften webbed to
make swimming more efficient
 Live both in water and on land.
REPTILES
 Poikilothermic (cold blooded)
 dry skin, with scales
 four legs (apart from snakes)
 produce eggs with a rubbery, waterproof
shell; laid on land
 Have lungs for breathing
 Most reptiles live in warm habitats
BIRDS
 are homoeothermic (warm blooded
 feathers, with scales on legs
 two wings and two legs
 produce eggs with a
 hard shell, laid on land
 lungs for breathing; beak
 live in water and on land
MAMMALS
 are homoeothermic (warm blooded)
 produce live young
 lungs for breathing
 females have mammary glands to
produce milk to feed young;
 four types of teeth
 live on land
Key word
Poikilothermic: is an animal whose internal temperature varies
considerably.
Homoeothermic: organisms able to maintain a constant internal
body temperature.
BIRDSMAMMALS
hard shell, laid on land
lungs for breathing; beak
live in water and on land
Example   - pigeon and duck
Example    - cow, human and sheep
Activity: 5. 9 collecting and examining amphibian (frog)
Material you require: transparent container or cage, pairs of forceps,
pairs of gloves.
Procedure: 1.Collect live or freshly killed toads or frogs keep in
transparent container or cage.
2. Examine the head and trunk regions of the toad. You should note
and identify the following characteristic features: Mouth, Nostrils,
Eyes Ear, Trunk, limbs.
3. Does the toad/frog have a tail?
4. Make a large well-labelled drawing of the toad/frog as seen from
the slide
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Key word
Poikilothermic: an animal  whose internal temperature varies
considerably.
Homoeothermic: organisms able to maintain a constant internal
body temperature.
I. choose the corect answer from the given alternatives
1. Which of the following vertebrates are characterized by four
limbs with back feet are often webbed, moist skin and live both
in water and on land?
A. Mammal       B.  fish        C.  reptiles    D. amphibian
2.  Which of the following is not true about insect? They posses
A. three segmented body   B. a pair of antennae
C. two pairs of legs           D. typically two pair’s wings
3. Writes the distinguishing characteristic of mammals and birds.
5.2.2.  Kingdom Plantae
Major characteristics of plants
Organisms belonging to the plant kingdom are eukaryotic and
multicellular organisms. They have a distinct cell wall made of
cellulose. Cells are organized into true plant tissues. Plants contain
plastids and photosynthetic pigments such as chlorophyll. They are
non-motile. Plants make their own food by photosynthesis and are
therefore said to be autotrophic. Plants undergo both sexual and
asexual reproduction. They store food as starch.
Major groups of plants and their habitats:
Important examples of plants are mosses, ferns, conifers and flowering
plants.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure: 5.6 major groups of plants
Non vascular plants (lack vascular tissue)
Vascular systems consist of xylem tissue, which transports water and
minerals, and phloem tissue, which transports sugars and proteins.
Bryophytes: The Phylum Bryophyta, are the most diverse group
with more than 10,000 plant species.
• This phylum includes the mosses, liverworts, and hornworts.
• They lack vascular tissue and wood that can render them
structural support.
• They also lack true leaves, stem, and roots that can help them
transport water and nutrients.
• Live in moist places and somehow have adapted several methods
that can help them thrive in dry periods.
• Reproduce through spores.
• Play an important role in minimizing erosion along bodies of
water, carrying out water and nutrient cycling
Plant Kingdom
Mosses &
LiverWorts         Ferns   Gymnosperms
(conifers)
Angiosperms
(Flowering Plants)
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure 5: 7 different types’ bryophytes
Mosses Liver wort Horn wort
Activity: 5. 10 collecting and examining mosses
Materials you require:  microscopes, hand lenses, scalpel blades, forceps,
microscope slides and cover slips.
Procedure: 1. in groups search around the school for moss plants
around damp walls, rocks, tree barks or damp verandas. Then you
should carry collected specimen into the laboratory for detailed study.
2.With the help of a hand lens examine the specimen carefully and
identify the parts.
3. You draw and label your specimen.
Figure 5.8 the structure of pteridiophytes (fern)
Key terms:
Vascular Plants: possess vascular tissues (xylem and phloem)  that
aid them to transport water, minerals and food
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Pteridophytes
•  have well-developed xylem and phloem
•  Pteridophytes are seedless plants but they pass their genetics to
offspring through spores that are located on the underside of their
leaves known as sporophylls.
•   Unlike bryophytes, they are already vascular plants and capable of
transporting fluids.
•   The stem and leaves have sieve tubes and water conducting cells
similar to those in the xylem and phloem of a flowering plant.
•    The stem is usually entirely below ground and takes the form of a
structure called a rhizome.
•    The leaves of ferns vary from one species to another
•    Pteridophytes have already adapted to a wide range of habitat: they
can be aquatic, terrestrial, and even cold-resistant.
Activity: 5. 11   Collecting and examining a fern
Material you require: hand lenses, scalpels, clean slides, cover slips,
and microscopes.
Procedure
1. In groups, you should search for a fern along rivers/stream banks,
shady areas beneath trees and along fences.
2. Examine your specimens and identify as many structures as they can.
3. Draw and label their specimen.
4. Observe the lower surface of the leaves (fronds).
5. Draw the lower surface of the specimen showing the arrangement
of the spore-forming bodies if there are any there.
6. Using forceps or a needle, remove a capsule if they can see one,
mount it on a slide and view under low power. Draw what you see.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Fig 5.9 structures of
gymnosperm
Exercise: 5. 6
1. What is the difference between bryophytes and  pteridophytes
2. Writes the importance of bryophytes in the environments
Gymnosperms (confers plant)
• The name “gymnosperm” literally means “naked seed“, which is
exhibited by the members by having cones instead of seeds to
reproduce. Their seed are not enclosed in fruit.
• They are widely distributed in the planet but dominate the temperate
and arctic regions. The stem and leaves have sieve tubes and water
conducting cells similar to those in the xylem and phloem of a
flowering plant.
• They are characterized by having wood, and green needle-like or
scale-like foliage.
•  gymnosperms are good sources of
wood and paper
Activity: 5.12
collecting and examining conifers
Material you require:  saw, conifer
leaves and cones.
Procedure: In groups, you should search
and collect a conifer tree in you school
compound.
1. Obtain some conifer leaves and cones.
2. Observe them carefully.
3. Make large well-libeled drawings of the leaves of conifer.
4. Examine some conifer cones. Note the seeds attached to the cone.
Carefully remove one seed from the cone of conifer and draw it.
B. Collecting and examining angiosperm
Material you require: bean/pea plants with flowers and bean/pea
seed, maize plants with flowers and maize grain, hand lenses.
Procedure: Make a collection of flowering plants around your
school. Identify them and then classify them according to whether
they are monocotyledons or di cotyledons
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
1.  Collect a bean/pea plant and a maize plant.
2. Compare their roots, stems, leaves, flowers and seeds.
3. Make a table of differences between the bean plant and the maize
plant.
4. Draw well-labeled diagrams of the bean plant and the maize plant.
Angiosperms	(flowering	plants)
• They have true root, stem, leaves and flowers as reproductive organ
and the seed are enclosed in fruit.
• They reproduce by seeds which are formed in flowers.
• Flowering plants are divided into two subclasses: monocotyledons
and cotyledons.
• Their leaves are usually broad and the leaf veins form a branching
network
Most angiosperms are good sources of food, medicine, clothing fibers,
and wood.
Develop a table that simplifies and summarizes the kingdoms from
mosses to flowering plants as follows. You should copy the example
shown here and fill it in.
Figure 5:10 flowering plants
Division                  Characteristics        Examples
Bryophyta
Pteridophyta
Gymnosperm
Angiosperm
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
EXERCISE: 5.7
Choose the best answer from the give suggested option
1. True root, stem and leaves are found in_______.
A. lichens       B. algae   C. fungi     D. ferns
2. A group of plant characterized by the possession of a masses of spore
bearing structures under side of their leaves are;
A. ferns   B. lichen    C algae    D. worts
3.  A seed bearing but non flowering plants are
A. algae     B. angiosperm  C. gymnosperm   D. ferns
4.  Which one of  the following does not belong to Bryophytes?
A. Liverwort     B. mosses    C. hornwort   D. ferns
5. Which of the following group is vascular plants?
A. liverworts         B. mosses   C. Ferns      D. Hornwort
5.2.3 Kingdom Protista
figure 5.11 Protista
Major characteristics of Protista
Protista are eukaryotic and can be unicellular. The kingdom protista
is diverse group.one ways to classify protists according to the way
they obtain nutrition. There are animallike, plantlike, funguses like
protistis. They reproduce sexually or asexually. Important examples
of protists include the organism known as Plasmodium (which causes
malaria), Amoeba and Euglena, Trypanosomes.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
There are two major groups of Protista include:
i. Protozoans:  are similar to animal cells in that they do not have   cell
walls Organisms such as Amoeba and Paramecium take in and digest
solid food and thus resemble   animals in their feeding. They may
be called unicellular ‘animals’
ii. Protophyta: the plant-like cells which do have cell walls and are
similar to algae.Euglena and Chlamydomonas possess chloroplasts
and make their food by photosynthesis  They often referred to as
unicellular ‘plants’
Activity: 5. 14 Making hay infusion and observing protozoan
(paramecium)
Materials: A hand full of hay, a large beaker, pond water, some milk
Method:
1. Take a hand full of dried grass or hay (free from pesticides or
herbicides) and cut the grass into smaller pieces
2. Place the cut grass into the beaker and about 0.5-1 liter of water.
3. Add 1-2 drops of milk. The water will turn slightly turbid. The
milk is food for the bacteria and they will start to reproduce.
The ciliates feed on the bacteria and will also reproduce.
4. Let the beaker stand open for several days, protected from
direct sunlight as this may result in overheating and the heat
will reduce the oxygen concentration. Do make sure that the
beaker receives sufficient light, though. Photosynthetic algae
present in the pond water will produce oxygen.
5. Keep adding 1-2 drops of milk when the turbidity disappears.
Bubble some air through the water at regular intervals (using
an air-pump from an aquarium) or agitate the water a bit to
enrich it with oxygen.
6. Replace the evaporated water.
7. Take some sample from the surface of the water (where there
is oxygen) for microscopic investigation.  If the water is agitated,
then the microorganisms are (of course) not able to collect beneath
the water surface.
8.  Observe paramecium using microscope and draw the
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
5.2.4.  Kingdom Monera
Major characteristics of Monera
The Kingdom Monera consists of prokaryotic unicellular organisms.
No nuclear membrane or membrane-bound organelles such
as chloroplasts, Golgi complex, mitochondria or endoplasmic
reticulum are present. Monera have a cell wall of protein plus
polysaccharide compound, but not cellulose. They reproduce
asexually by binary fission. Important examples of Monera include
blue green algae and Bacteria.
Major groups of monera and their habitats (Blue Green algae &
Bacteria)
Blue-green algae, is prokaryotic singled celled photosynthetic
organisms containing a blue pigment in addition to chlorophyll they
also called cyanobacteria.
Predominantly occur singly or in colonies in diverse habitats in
freshwater or a terrestrial environment
They are microscopic but can be seen when they are in a colony,
or bloom. Cyanobacteria contain only one form of chlorophyll
(a green pigment.) In addition, they contain various yellowish
carotenoids, the blue pigment phycobilin and, in some species,
the red pigment phycoerythrin. The combination of phycobilin
and chlorophyll produces the characteristic blue-green color
from which these organisms derive their popular name.
Cyanobacteria are the first organisms known to have produced oxygen
as a byproduct of photosynthesis
Figure.5:12 Colony and filamentous form of blue green algae
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure: 5.13 structures and shapes of bacteria
1. Define prokaryotes and eukaryotes cell.
2. Explain the difference between prokaryote and eukaryotes.
5.2.5 Kingdom fungi
Major characteristics of fungi
Fungi are eukaryotic (have membrane bounded nucleus) organisms
that can be multicellular or unicellular. Mushrooms and molds
are examples of multicellular fungi and yeast is an example of
a unicellular fungi. All fungi have a cell wall made of chitin.
Bacteria: are very small organisms consisting of single cells they lack
organized nucleus and chlorophyll pigments
Their cell walls are made, not of cellulose, but of a complex
mixture of proteins, sugars and lipids (peptidoglycan).They can be
found in various shapes and sizes, may be spherical, rod-shaped
or spiral and some have filaments, called flagella, projecting
from them and serve for movement. The genetic material DNA is
contained in the cytoplasm called nucleoid. Bacteria are found
everywhere and are the most numerous organisms on Earth.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
They are non-motile (not capable of movement) and consist of
threads called hyphae. Fungi are heterotrophic organisms which
mean they require organic compounds of carbon and nitrogen for
nourishment. They are important as decomposer (saprophytes) and
can be parasitic. They store carbon as glycogen, not in the form of
starch. Fungi reproduce sexually and asexually by spore formation.
Yeast: single-celled fungi.  It converts complex carbohydrates into
alcohol and carbon-dioxide. Used for a variety of commercial purposes
like baking (’injera’ or bread) and in the production of alcohol.
Mould: fungi which grow on decayed bread, cheese, fruit or other
food. Many of the mould fungi live in the soil or in dead wood.Another
important example of a useful fungus is Penicillium (a fungus which
was used to make penicillin, one of the most powerful antibiotics
ever created). mushroom is the flush, spore bearing fruiting body
of fungus typically produced above ground, on soil, or on its food
sources. Edible mushrooms are the flush and edible fruiting bodies
.includes many fungal species that are harvested, wild or cultivated.
Activity: 5.15 collecting and looking at fungi
Materials you require:  microscopes, hand lenses, scalpel blades,
forceps, microscope slides and cover slips.
Procedure: 1. In groups search around the school for mushroom
in the school compound or if necessary you can grow your own
fungi (moulds)   on a little moist injera or by letting a piece of
fruit go rotten. Some of them may be quite big like (mushroom)
but they may want to use a microscope to look at some of them.
Look at different structures of fungi (fruiting body or mycelium.Draw
several different types of fungus.
Figure 5:14 different types of fungi
Mushroom Ye a s t Mold
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Unity summary
•    The seven characteristics of living things are movement, respiration,
sensitivity, growth, reproduction, excretion and nutrition
•     A species is a group of organisms that can reproduce to produce fertile
offspring.
•  The binomial system is an internationally agreed system in which
the scientific name of an organism is made up of two parts showing
the genus and the species.
•   Classification is a way of sorting organisms into a meaningful order
•  The artificial classification based on one or a few easily observed
characteristics
•   Natural or biological classification system tries to use natural
relationships between organisms
•   The smallest natural group of organisms is the species
•   The five kingdom system is the most common way of grouping
living things based on simple distinctive characteristics.
•    The sequences of classification are Kingdom, Phylum, Class, Order,
Family, Genus, and Species
•   Living things can be classified into five major kingdoms: Kingdom
Animalia, Plantae, Fungi, Protista, and Monera (Bacteria
•   Animal kingdom is eukaryotic and multicellular but has no cell
wall or photosynthetic pigments. They are mostly motile and they
are heterotrophic,
•   Insect has three parts:  head, thorax and abdomen regions with  three
pairs of jointed legs, compound eyes and, typically, two pairs of
wings
•    Plant kingdom is eukaryotic and multicellular organisms. They have
a distinct cell wall made of cellulose.
•   Bryophytes are non-vascular plants that lack true leaves, stem, and
roots that can help them transport water and nutrients.
•   Pteridophytes are vascular plants that have well-developed xylem
and phloem that reproduce by spores.
•   Gymnosperms are vascular plants that bearing cone.
•   Angiosperms are flowering plants that reproduce by seeds which
are formed in flowers.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
•     Protista are eukaryotic and can be unicellular or simple multicellular.
They reproduce sexually or asexually.
•   Monera are of prokaryotic unicellular organisms that lack the
membrane bounded organelle and reported by binary fusion
•    Bacteria are very small organisms consisting of single cells they
lack organized nucleus and chlorophyll pigments
•    Fungi are eukaryotic (have membrane bounded nucleus)
organisms that can be multicellular or unicellular and have chitin
cell wall.
I. Write “true” if the statements are correct and “false” if the
statements are incorrect
1. Blue green algae belongs to the kingdom-Protista
2. Bacteria are found everywhere and are the most numerous
organisms on Earth.
3. The Kingdom Monera consists of prokaryotic multicellular
organisms.
4. Protoctists are single-celled organisms containing a nucleus.
5. Amphibians can breathe in air or in water.
6. Mammals have fur, they suckle their young and the young
develop inside the mother.
7. Mosses have well-developed stems, leaves, roots and reproduce
by spores.
8. Fungi are made up of thread-like hyphae and an autotroph
organism.
9. Insects mostly live on land and have wings and two pairs of legs.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
II. Match correct terms/meaning given in column ‘B’ with their
correct levels given in column ‘A’
‘A’                                                        ‘B’
1. Plants
2. Fungi
3. Protists
4. Animal
5. Monera
III. Fill the following question by the appropriates terms
1. The type naming organism  using the Latin name  indicating
genus and species is called___________
A. made up of thread-like hyphae &
reproduce by spores.
B. makes their food by photosynthesis.
C. gets their food by eating plants or other
animals.
D. single-celled organisms containing
a nucleus.
E. single celled organism lacking nucleus
2._____group of organisms which are able to interbreed and produce
fertile offspring.
3. _______is the scientific name of our human race.
4. _______the type of asexual reproduction in the Kingdom  Monera.
5. Highest grouping in a classification system_________________
IV . Choose the best answer from the following suggested option
1. Which one of the following is not a defining characteristic of all
organisms?
A. Growth    B. respiration    C. locomotion   D, Reproduction
2.  The smallest natural group of organisms is the_________.
A. Kingdom     B. Species    C. phylum  D. class
3.  If two organisms belong to the same order, then they must also
belong to the same
A. Genes           B. class          C. family      D. species
4.  An organism's scientific name is based on how it is classified.
Which of the following levels of classification determine the name?
A. Genus and species               B. Phylum and class
C. Order and family                 D. kingdom and spies
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
5.  The science of identifying, classifying, and naming living things
is called?
A. System        B. nomenclature      C. Taxonomy      D. hierarchy
6.   The level below the kingdom is______.
A. Genus     B. order     C. phylum     D. class
7.   The sequence of scientific category from general to specific:
A. Species---- genera---family---order --- class---phylum  kingdom
B. Genera--- family---order ---class---phylum kingdom---genus
C. order---class---phylum---kingdom---family---species---genus
D. kingdom----phylum---class---order---family---genus---species
8.   Protists are;
A. All autotrophs cannot make their own food
B. All autotrophs can make their own food
C. They can be either autotrophs and heterotrophs
D. They are not eukaryotic (do not have nucleus
9.    Which kingdom best fit a mushroom?
A. Animal        B. Fungi    C. plant    D. protist
10. The main function of the vascular bundles found in many plants
is to ...
A. taps energy or food making
B. carry out photosynthesis
C. assist plant in reproduction
D. transport substances around the plant
11. The scientific (and common) names of three animals are: Canis
familiaris (dog), Canis lupis (wolf) These three animals all
belong to the same ...
A. Class but different genera
B. Genus but different species
C.  Species different genera
D. Class different species
12. In a five-kingdom system of classification, bacteria are members of
A. kingdom       B.fungi    C. plants       D.monera       E.protests
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
V . Give short answer for the following question
1.   Explain the importance of classification hierarchy.
2.   Describe the relationship of hierarchical levels in classification.
3.   Explain the major characteristics kingdom animalia and fungi.
4.   Writes the unique or distinguishing characteristics of kingdom
plantia, Protista and monera.
5. Sort the following list of organisms with respet to the kingdom
they belong
Living things                Genus                    Gymnosperms
Classification                Pteridophytes          Protista
Specie                          Class                    Monera
Lizard               amoeba      paramecium     blue green      algae
Papaya              spider         termites           mushroom      yeast
Sunflower         pigeon        rat                     maize             salmonella
Trypanosome    pea            euglena              mold              Sorghum
bacteria
Binomial system                Family                    Vascular
Kingdom                          Eukaryotic          Angiosperms
Sorting                          Multicellular          Spore
Phylum                           Unicellular          Prokaryotic
Order                                     Bryophytes          Poikilothermic
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Unit 6  EARTH IN SPACE
Learning Outcome
At the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• describe the shape of the Earth;
• identify evidences supporting the shape of the Earth;
• list local and global ideas about the shape of the   Earth;
• name dimensions (circumferences, diameters, and angular
distances) of the Earth;
• recognize all parts of the Earth;
• describe the organization and contents of the different parts of
the Earth;
• explain different observations about the Earth in terms of the
nature and behaviors of the different parts of  the  Earth;
• demonstrate movements of the Earth (revolution and rotation);
• explain the effects of motions of the Earth;
• construct the model of Earth and use it to explain phenomena
related to its motion;
• identify atmospheric and lithospheric systems;
• explain their cycle effects of the Earth;
• describe the measuring techniques for too big (Earth) and to
small (continental drift) quantities measurement and
estimation.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Contents
Section                                 Learning competencies
6.1. Shape & dimensions
6.2. Parts of the Earth (Body
& Atmosphere)
6.3. Movements of the
Earth
6.4. Atmospheric and
lithospheric Systems &
Cycles, (effects,
measurement ideas/
estimation)
•   Describe the shape of the Earth
•   Identify evidences supporting the
shape of the Earth
•   List local and global ideas about the
shape of the Earth
•   Name dimensions (circumferences,
diameters, and angular distances)
of the Earth
• Recognize all parts of the Earth
• Describe the organization and contents
of the different parts of the Earth
• Explain different observations about the
Earth in terms of the nature and behav-
iors of the different parts of the Earth.
•    Demonstrate movements of the Earth
(revolution and rotation)
• Explain the effects of motions of
the Earth.
• Construct the model of Earth and
use it  to  explain phenomena related
to its motion
• Identify atmospheric and
lithospheric systems.
• Explain their cycle effects of the
Earth
• Describe the measuring techniques
for too big (Earth) and to small
(continental drift) quantities
measurement and estimation
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
6.1  Shape and Dimensions of The Earth
Form a group and perform the following activities.
I. By referring internet explorer or other reference materials
discuss about the shape of the earth
II. Identify the local and global assumptions and evidences about
its shape.
At  the end of this section you will be able to:
• describe the shape of the Earth;
• identify evidences supporting the shape of the Earth;
• list local and global ideas about the shape of the Earth.
This unit introduces the concept of Earth in Space, parts of the
Earth and shape and dimensions of the Earth. The unit also presents
atmospheric and Lithospheric Systems & Cycles, (effects, measurement
ideas/estimation).
Introduction
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
What Is Earth?
Our Planet Earth is one of the eight planets in our Solar System and
the only known planet to support life. It is our home planet that
everything is just right for life to exist. Geologists study the materials,
processes, products, physical nature, and history of the Earth.
Shape of the Earth
What are the local ideas about the shape of the Earth?
In ancient times, mankind has different questions and assumptions
about the geometrical shape of our planet earth. Locally most cultures
describe the Earth as flat such as:
•  The early ancient Greeks, Sumerians, Babylonians, Egyptians
and Vikings all believed that the Earth was a flat disc or plane
surrounded by water. This was based on the evidence of what they
saw around them.
•   The ancient Chinese believed that the Earth was a flat square
shape surrounded by heavens that were a round egg shape. This
was based on their belief in a heaven that was above the Earth.
•   Members of the Flat Earth Society claim to believe the Earth was
flat. A Flat Earth model depicting Antarctica as an ice wall
surrounding a disc-shaped Earth. Walking around on the
planet's surface, it looks and feels flat.
Form a group and build model of the
earth including its body parts and
make discussion about shape with
your class mates then present your
work to the rest of the class.
Figure 6.1.  Flat shape assumption of the earth
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
The primary reason why ancient people believed the Earth was flat
because it look flat from our vantage point on the ground. The mis-
conception arises simply because the Earth is big.
Another assumption about the shape of the were Earth was round.
Most ancient Greeks believed the Earth was round not flat. The two
main reasons for their assumption were:
o  Lunar eclipses:  during a lunar eclipse the shadow of the Earth
always had a round profile.
o  Star patterns: The second observation was the change in the
pattern of stars as you move from north to south.
Around 500 B.C. Pythagoras first proposed a spherical Earth shape.
His idea lies, mainly on aesthetic grounds rather than on any physical
evidence. Based on actual physical evidence  Aristotle (384-322 B.C.)
listed the following arguments for a spherical Earth.
o Ships disappear hull first when they sail over the horizon,
o Different constellations are visible at different latitudes.
Figure 6.2. if earth were flat ,
its shadow during an eclipse
would be straight on the moon,
not covered.
Today scientists argue that the shape
of Earth is "Oblate spheroid" where
'Oblate' refers to a slight elliptical ap-
pearance and 'spheroid' means almost
a sphere but not actually a sphere. This
describes the true shape of the Earth,
which means flatten at the poles and
bulges in the middle.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure 6.4 . different assumptions about the earth when flaying plane
Evidences about the true Shape of the Earth
a b
1. Circumnavigation of the earth:
If you travel across the world
along a straight path in a fast flying
plane without stopping anywhere,
you would come back to the same
place from where you started. This
is called circumnavigation.
2. Earth’s curved horizon – The earth’s horizon when seen from
a ship, a plane, or a high cliff appears curved. The curved horizon
widens as the observers altitude increases until it becomes circular. If
the earth were not spherical, there would be no circular horizon. The
curvature of the horizon is influenced by the curvature of the earth’s
surface.
There are many ways to prove that the earth is spherical. The following
are some of them:
Figure: 6.3.  Oblate spheroid
Shape of the Earth
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure 6.5. Ship’s visibility
3.  Ship’s visibility:
When two ships on the same line of observation are coming towards
the observer while maintaining a considerable distance, the front Ship
will be seen before the ship at the back. If the earth’s surface were flat,
both ships could be seen at the same time. This Provides the earth is
spherical in shape.
4. Sun rise and sun set:  The sun rises and sets at different times in
different places. As the earth rotates from west to east, places in the
east see the sun earlier than those in the west. If the earth were flat, the
whole world would have sunrise and sunset at the same time. But we
know this is not happen because of spherical the shape of the earth.
5. The lunar eclipse: The shadow cast by the earth on the moon during
a lunar eclipse is always circular. It takes the outline of an arc of a circle.
Only a sphere can cast such a circular shadow as shown in figure 6.6
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
7. The changing altitude of the sun -  Even though the sun is at
constant position in the sky. In the morning and evening the sun
observed to be at low level while at noon the sun observed to be at a
high level.
Figure 6.6. The position of the Sun, moon and earth, in an eclipse
6. Space photographs: Pictures taken from high altitudes by rockets
and satellites show clearly the curved edge of the earth. This is
perhaps the most convincing and the most up-to-date proof of the
earth’s sphericity.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
I.    Choose the best answer from the given alternatives.
1. The Earth's actual shape is most correctly described as
A. a perfect sphere     C. an oblate sphere
B. a circle                   D. an eccentric ellipse
2. Which object best represents a true scale model of the shape of
the Earth?
A. a Ping-Pong ball    C. a football
B. an egg                    D. globe
3. The shape of the earth is_______
II. Short answer questions.
1. Write evidences that support  the true shape of the earth.
2. List local and global ideas about the shape of the earth
A.   egg shaped
B.   spherical
C.   Angular
D.  Flat
6.1.2   Dimensions of the Earth
At the end of this section you will be able to:
• name dimensions (circumferences, diameters, and angular
distances) of the Earth.
Form a group and discuss about circumference, diameters and angular
distances of the earth. Then present your discussion to the whole
class.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
•  Equatorial diameter - is longer than polar diameter (12,756 km).
•  Polar diameter - is shorter than equatorial diameter (12,714 km).
•   Equatorial circumference - is longer than polar circumference
(40,075  km).
•   Polar circumference - is shorter than equatorial circumference
(40,008 km).
• AU- astronomical unit
Note
How big is Earth?
The dimension of the earth can be expressed in terms of radius,
diameter, circumference, mass, and time.
Earth, is one of the eight planets and its average distance to the sun
is 1 AU (1.496 × 108 km). Its diameter (the distance from one side to
the other through Earth's center) is about 12,756 kilometers), a polar
diameter of 12,714 km, and its mass is 5.974 × 1024 kg.
Earth's circumference (around the equator) is 40,075 kilometers;
however, from pole to pole the meridional circumference of Earth
is only 40,008 km. The Earth's diameter is also wider at the Equator,
creating a phenomenon called an equatorial bulge.
The orbital and rotational period of planet Earth is 365.256 days  and
23.9345 hours, respectively.
Angular distance is (also known as angular separation) is the angle
between the two sightlines, or between two point objects as viewed
from an observer.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
6.2   Parts of the Earth (Body and Atmosphere)
Structure of the Earth
i.   Fill the blank space
1. The Earth's diameter is wider at the Equator, creating a
phenomenon called an ______________.
2.   ___________ is the angle between the two sight lines.
ii.  Short answer questions
1.  What is the Precise measurements of the Earth
a.  polar diameter?
b.  Polar circumference?
c.  Equatorial diameter?
d.  Equatorial circumference?
At the end of this section you will be able to
• recognize all parts of the Earth;
• describe the organization and contents of the different parts of
the Earth;
• explain different observations about the Earth in terms of the
nature and behaviors of the different parts of the Earth.
Form a group and discus the following activities and present
your discussion to the class.
1.   What are the layers of the atmosphere?
2.   2. In which layer    a)  we live on?      b) and air plane flay?
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure 6.7 vertical structure of the atmosphere
Structure of the Earth is the composition of the atmospheric layer
and solid or mineral part of the Earth. The structure of the earth
consists of
1. External structure (Outer zone) and
2. Internal structure (Inner zone)
6.2.1 External Structure of the Earth (Outer zone)
External structure of the earth consists of different  layers of the
Atmosphere.
Atmosphere
Atmosphere is the thin layer of gases held on the earth by gravitation
attraction. Earth’s atmosphere is so much more than the air we breathe.
It is composed by abiotic (non-living matter) and biotic matter (living
organism). Non-living matter found in the atmosphere includes
mixture of gases, water vapor and dust particles. Atmosphere consists
of different gases such as carbon dioxide(0.03%), oxygen(21%),
nitrogen(78%) and other gases(0.97%). The living organism includes
the smallest or microscopic organisms like bacteria.
Vertical stracture of an atmosphere is the run of pressure, temperature,
density, chemical composition with distance from the center of the
Earth.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
I. Troposphere
The troposphere is the lowest layer of  Earth’s atmosphere - the part we
live in. It contains most of our weather such as clouds, rain, and snow.
It contains about 75% of all of the air in the atmosphere, and almost
all of the water vapor (which forms clouds and rain). The decrease in
temperature with height is a result of the decreasing pressure. Thus,
air higher up is cooler than air lower down.
The lowest part of the troposphere is called the boundary layer.
The top of the troposphere is called the tropopause. This
is lowest at the poles, where it is about 7 - 10 km above the
Earth’s surface. It is highest (about 17 - 18 km) near the equator.
Air is warmest at the bottom of the troposphere near ground level.
Air gets colder as one rises through the troposphere. That is why the
peaks of tall mountains can be snow-covered even in the summer time.
II. Stratosphere
Stratosphere is the second layer of the atmosphere as you go upward.
This extends upwards about 50 km above the surface of the Earth.
It contains much of the ozone in the atmosphere. The increase in
temperature with height occurs because of absorption of ultraviolet
(UV) radiation from the sun by this ozone. Temperatures in the
stratosphere are highest over the summer pole, and lowest over the
winter pole. By absorbing dangerous UV radiation, the ozone in the
stratosphere protects us from skin cancer and other health damage.
The Lower boundary of the stratosphere is called the
tropopause; the upper boundary is called the stratopause.
III. Mesosphere
The mesosphere is the third layer of Earth’s atmosphere. The
mesosphere is directly above the Stratosphere and below the
thermosphere. It extends from about 50 to 85 km above our planet.
Temperature decreases with height throughout the mesosphere. The
coldest temperatures in Earth’s atmosphere, about -90° C at the
“mesopause.''
The boundary between the mesosphere and the thermosphere above
it is called the Mesopause.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
I. Choose the best answer from the given alternatives.
1. The ___________ is the outer most layer of Earth's atmosphere.
A.  troposphere                 C.  stratosphere
B.   exosphere                   D.  thermosphere
2. What makes up nearly 78 percent of the Earth’s atmosphere?
A. Oxygen                         C. Nitrogen
B. Carbon dioxide             D. Hydrogen
3.  What percentage of the earth's atmosphere does oxygen comprise?
A. 75%       B.  50%            C. 21%            D.  32%
4. In which layer of our atmosphere weather occurs?
A.  Troposphere                   C. Stratosphere
B.   Exosphere                      D. Thermosphere
II. Short answer questions
1. Referring to diagram write the name of each layer in the Earth’s
atmosphere
A. ___________________
B. ___________________
C. ____________________
D. ____________________
IV . Thermosphere
The thermosphere lies above the mesopause, it extends from about
90 km  to between 500 and 1,000 km above our planet. It is a region
in which temperatures again increase with height. This temperature
increase is caused by the absorption of energetic ultraviolet and
X-Ray radiation from the sun. The temperature of the thermosphere
varies between night and day and between the seasons.
The boundary between the thermosphere and the exosphere above it
is called the Thermopause.
V . Exosphere
Located between about 700 and 10,000 kilometers  above Earth’s
surface, the exosphere is the highest layer of Earth’s atmosphere.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
D
B
C
A
6.2.2  Internal Structure of the Earth (Inner zone)
Using 5 colors of modeling clay and waxed dental floss make in group
a model of solid Earth layers and show the model to your teacher.
Directions
• Waxed dental floss
• Form a ball to represent the inner core. We choose  red to represent
the intense heat of the inner core.
• Next, roll out a circle of another color and wrap around the ball
and roll gently. This next layer represents the outer core.
• Each subsequent color will need more modeling clay than the
last. You will need a color to represent the lower mantle, another
for the upper mantle, and the outer layer for the crust.
•   Once your ball of 5 layers of modeling clay is complete, use
a piece of waxed dental floss to cut the ball down the middle,
revealing all the layers underneath.
*Be sure not to press the layers too firmly together so that the colors
don’t mix.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
I. The Crust
The Earth crust is the outside and coldest layer of the earth and is made
of solid rock, mostly basalt and granite. It is the thinnest layer and
forms the outer shell on which life exists. There are two types of crust;
oceanic and continental. Oceanic crust is denser, 5 to 10 kilometers
thick and mainly composed of basalt. However, Continental crust is
less dense, thicker, and mainly composed of granite, and the upper
layer of the earth crust.
II.  The mantle
The mantle is the thickest layer, lies between Earth's dense, super-
heated core and its thin outer layer, the crust. It is composed of atomic
elements include oxygen, silicon and magnesium. It is a solid layer
but acts like a viscous liquid due to temperatures being close to the
melting point of key minerals in this layer. Below the crust is the upper
mantle, with the upper-most portion referred to as the asthenosphere.
The upper mantle is liquid rock, and very hot. The lower mantle is the
lower liquid portion of the mantle.
i.    Crust
ii.   Mantle
iii.  Core
Figure : 6.8. Internal structure of the earth
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Note: The lithosphere is the solid, outer part of the Earth, including
the brittle upper portion of the mantle and the crust.
III.  The Core
Earth’s core is the very hot, very dense center of our planet. It is
composed mainly of an iron and nickel alloy. The core is divided
into inner and outer core.
The outer core is a liquid because the temperatures there are
adequate to melt the iron-nickel alloy. However, the inner core is
a solid even though its temperature is higher than the outer core.
I. Fill the blank space
1. The boundary between the mesosphere and the thermosphere
is called _____________________.
2. ________________is located at the bottom of the mesosphere and
the boundary between the mesosphere and the stratosphere below.
3. Lower boundary of the stratosphere is called the______________.
4. Upper boundary of the stratosphere is called the _____________.
II.Choose the best answer from the given alternatives.
1.  Which layer of the earth is solid ?
A.  Inner  mantle and inner core
B.  Crust and outer core.
C.  Crust  and the  inner core
2.  Which layer of the earth is liquid ?
A.  The outer core
B.  Mantle  crust  and the inner core
C.  Crust and outer core.
3.   Which layer of the earth is both solid and liquid?
A.  Mantle            B.  Crust         C. Core
4.  What do we call the center of the Earth?
A.  Mantle            B. Crust          C. Core
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
The Earth is in motion all the time. People cannot feel this
motion because they move with it.
There are two types  of movements of the earth, namely:
1. The rotation of the Earth on its own axis
2. The revolution of the Earth around the Sun
Form a group and discuss the following phenomena.
i. Why do not we feel when the Earth move?
ii. What would happen if the Earth didn't rotate?
Share your views with the rest of the class
6.3.   Earth’s Movements
5. What is the outermost layer of the Earth that consists of the continents
and the oceans?
A. Mantle               B. Crust                        C. Core
6. What is the layer of the Earth between the outer core and crust?
A.   Core      B. Mantle            C. Crust
7. What do we call the crust that makes up the continents (land)?
A.   Tectonic plates               C.  Continental crust
B.   Oceanic crust
8. The hottest layer of the Earth is:
A.   Mantle              C. Outer core
B.  Inner core
At the end of this section you will be able to:
•  demonstrate movements of the Earth (revolution and rotation);
•  explain the effects of motions of the Earth;
•  construct the model of Earth and use it to explain phenomena
related to its motion.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
6.3.1 Rotation of Earth
Earth Rotation is the motion of the earth around its axis of rotation.
An Imaginary  a line passing through the center of Earth that goes
through both the North Pole and the South Pole is called an axis. The
movement of Earth around its axis, from west to east is rotation..
Earth requires 23 hours, 56 minutes, and 4 seconds to make one
complete rotation on its axis. Hence the length of a day on Earth is
actually 24 hours.
Nicolaus Copernicus was a Polish
astronomer known as the father of modern
astronomy. He was the first modern
European scientist to propose that Earth
and other planets revolve around the sun,
or the Heliocentric Theory of the universe.
Figure 6.9 rotation of the earth
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Effects	of	motions	of	the	Earth
The rotation of the Earth has the following effects:
•  The spinning of the earth on its axis causes days turn into nights
and vice versa.
•  A difference of one hour is created between two meridians which
are 15 degrees apart.
•   A change in the direction of wind and ocean currents. Winds and
ocean currents deflect to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and
to the left in the Southern Hemisphere as a result of rotation.
•  The rise and fall of tide every day.
6.3.2 Revolution of the Earth
Earth Revolution is the motion of the earth around the sun. For Earth
to make one complete revolution around the Sun takes 365.24 days.
This amount of time is the definition of one year.
The closest Earth gets to the Sun each year is at perihelion (147
million km) on about January 3rd and the furthest is at aphelion (152
million km) on July 4th. During one revolution around the Sun, Earth
travels at an average distance of about 150 million km. Earth revolves
around the Sun at an average speed of about 27 km per second, but the
speed is not constant. The planet moves slower when it is at aphelion
and faster when it is at perihelion. The reason the Earth has seasons
is that Earth is tilted 23 ½ degree on its axis. During the Northern
Hemisphere summer the North Pole points toward the Sun and in the
Northern Hemisphere winter the North Pole is tilted away from the Sun.
Note:
1. The farthest (maximum distance) position from the sun in orbit
of the earth is called aphelion while the nearest position of the earth
to the Sun is known as perihelion
2. Meridian is acircle on the surface of the earth passing through the
poles.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure 6.10 Revolution of the Earth showing solstice and Equinox .
Earth’s seasons changes because its axis tilted by 23.50 relative to
Earth’s orbit around the sun. Thus, the sun’s rays hit different parts of
the planet more directly depending on the time of year.
• From June to August, the sun’s rays hit the Northern Hemisphere
more directly than the Southern Hemisphere. The result is warm
(summer) weather in the Northern Hemisphere and cold (winter)
weather in the Southern Hemisphere.
• From December to February, the sun’s rays hit the Northern
Hemisphere less directly than the Southern Hemisphere. The result
is cold (winter) weather in the Northern Hemisphere and warm
(summer)  weather in the Southern Hemisphere.
• From September to November, the sun shines equally on both
hemispheres. The result is fall in the Northern Hemisphere and
spring in the Southern Hemisphere.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
I.   Fill the blank space
1.  Earth _________________ around the sun.
2.  Day and night are the result of Earth’s ____________________
3.  Seasons are the result of Earth's _______________ around the sun.
II. Choose the best answer from the given alternatives.
1.  Which of the following is NOT a factor affecting Earth's seasons
or climate?
A. Earth's orbital revolution around the sun.
B. Earth's axis tilt.
C. Earth's distance from the sun.
D. Earth's wind and ocean current patterns.
2. How long does the Earth take to complete one rotation on its axis?
A. 24 hours           B. 12 hours          C. 1 hour         D. 6 hours
• The sun also shines equally on both hemispheres from March to
May. The result is spring in the Northern Hemisphere and fall in
the Southern Hemisphere.
The table 6.1 given below provides the basic differences between
rotation and revolution.
Rotation Revolution
Rotation is the movment of Earth
on its axis.
evolution is the movement of
the Earth around the Sun.
The Earth takes 24 hours to
complete a rotation.
The Earth takes 365 days for
one complete revolution around
the Sun
The imaginary line that passes
through the center of the Earth
and the poles is called an axis.
The path of the Earth moving
around the Sun is called an orbit.
The Earth’s orbit is elliptical.
The rotation of earth on its axis
causes day and night.
The revolution of earth around
the sun causes seasonal change.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Go to your library and read about four earth systems. the definitions of
each earth system.  Then Form a group discuss your findings and present
the following systems to the class.
a.   Atmosphere
b.   Lithosphere
c.   Hydrosphere
d.   Biosphere
6.4		Systems	and	Cycles	(effects,	measurement	ideas/estimation)
At the end of this section you will be able to:
• identify atmospheric and lithospheric systems;
• explain their cycle effects of the Earth;
• describe the measuring techniques for too big (Earth) and to
small (continental drift) quantities measurement and estimation.
6.4.1. Earth's Systems
Earth consists of land, air, water and life. The land contains mountains,
valleys and flat areas. The air is made up of different gases, mainly
nitrogen and oxygen. The water includes oceans, lakes, rivers, streams,
rain, snow and ice.Life consists of people, animals and plants. There
are millions of species, or kinds of life, on Earth. Their sizes range
from very tiny to very large.
Earth’s parts once were seen as largely separate from each other. Now
they are viewed together as the “Earth system.” Each part connects to
and affects each of the other parts.
For example:
• Clouds in the air drop rain and snow on land.
• Water gives life to plants and animals.
• V olcanoes on land send gas and dust into the air.
• People breathe air and drink water.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure 6.11 Earth Systems interactions
The Main Components of the Earth System
The earth system is an integrated system, but it can be subdivided into
four main components, sub-systems or spheres. Thess are geosphere,
atmosphere, hydrosphere and biosphere. These components are also
systems in their own right and they are tightly interconnected.
The four main components of the earth system are:
1. The geosphere (lithosphere): - this is the part of the Earth composed
of rock and minerals.  It includes the solid crust, the molten mantle
and the liquid and solid parts of the earth’s core. In many places, the
geosphere develops a layer of soil in which nutrients become available
to living organisms.
The surface of the geosphere is subject to processes of erosion,
weathering and transport, as well as to tectonic forces and volcanic
activity, which result in the formation of landforms such as mountains,
hills
2.The atmosphere -  this is the gaseous layer surrounding the earth
and held to its surface by gravity. The atmosphere receives energy
from solar radiation which warms the earth’s surface and is re-emitted
and conducted to the atmosphere.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
The atmosphere also absorbs water from the earth’s surface via the
process of evaporation; it then acts to redistribute heat and moisture
across the earth’s surface. In addition, the atmosphere contains
substances that are essential for life, including carbon, nitrogen, oxygen
and hydrogen.
3. The hydrosphere - this consists of those parts of the earth system
which composed of water in its liquid, gaseous (vapour) and  solid
(ice) phases.
4. The biosphere - this contains all living organisms and it is intimately
related to the other three spheres: most living organisms require gases
from the atmosphere, water from the hydrosphere and nutrients
and minerals from the geosphere.
Living organisms also require a medium for life, and are adapted to
inhabit one or more of the other three spheres.
These are described in the table 6.2 below
range from very tiny to very large. Below Earth's surface are layers of rock and metal.
Temperatures increase with depth, all the way to about 12,000 degrees Fahrenheit at
Earth's inner core.
Earth's parts once were seen as largely separate from each other. Now they are viewed
together as the "Earth system." Each part connects to and affects each of the other
parts. For example:
 Clouds in the air drop rain and snow on land.
 Water gives life to plants and animals.
 Volcanoes on land send gas and dust into the air.
 People breathe air and drink water.
Earth system science is the study of interactions between and among Earth's
different parts. Earth's parts - land, air, water and life - are always changing.
The Main Components of the Earth System
The earth system is itself an integrated system, but it can be subdivided into four main
components, sub -systems or spheres: the geosphere, atmosphere, hydrosphere and
biosphere. These components are also systems in their own right and they are tightly
interconnected. The four main components of the earth system may be described
briefly in the following way.
These are described in the table 6.2 below
Earth spheres Descriptions
1. Geosphere (lithosphere) all of the rocks and "hard parts" of the Earth
2. Hydrosphere all of Earth's water
3. Biosphere all living things
4. Atmosphere the blanket of gases surrounding the planet
These four subsystems are called "spheres."
Earth spheres Descriptions
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Make a group and refer encyclopedia, internet, in reference books,
or in other resource material about water cycle, carbon cycle and
nitrogen cycle. Write a report about your findings and present to a
class.
What is cycle?
Cycles are sequences of events that repeat themselves in the same
order. Cycles that exchange materials among living and nonliving
components of the Earth are known as biogeochemical cycles. The
key materials that cycle through the major biogeochemical cycles are
water cycle ,carbon cycle, nitrogen cycle, of which are essential for
life.
Water Cycle
The water cycle involves three main phases, related to the three states
of water: solid, liquid, and gas. Ice, or solid water, is most common
near the poles and at high altitudes. Ice sheets and glaciers hold the
most solid water. There are four main stages in the water cycle. These
are evaporation, condensation, precipitation and transpiration.
6.4.2.	Cycles	of	the	Earth	System	and	Effects
Figure 6.12. Water Cycle
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Evaporation:- is when warmth from the sun causes water from
oceans, lakes, streams, ice and soils to rise into the air and turn into
water vapor (gas). Water vapor droplets join together to make clouds.
Condensation: - is when water vapor in the air cools down and turns
back into liquid water.
Precipitation:- is when water (in the form of rain, snow, hail or sleet)
falls from clouds in the sky.
Transpiration : is the process of water movement through a plants.
The carbon cycle
The carbon cycle describes the process in which carbon atoms
continually travel from the atmosphere to the Earth and then back
into the atmosphere.
Steps of carbon cycle
1. CO2 Used by Plants for      5. Formation of Fossil Fuels
Photosynthesis
2. Consumption by Animals   6. Use of Fuels for Industrial Purposes
3. Ocean Intake                  7. Carbon Emissions
4.  Decay and Decompose      8. Respiration by Plants and Animals
Figure 6.13.  Carbon cycle
The Nitrogen Cycle
The process by which the balance of nitrogen is always maintained by
the exchange of nitrogen between living world and the environment
is known as nitrogen cycle.  Steps of nitrogen cycle: Nitrogen cycle
has five steps, such as:
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
a) Nitrogen fixation       b) Nitrification        c)Assimilation
d) Ammonification        e) De-Nitrification
Except assimilation all the four other types are completed by bacteria.
Figure 6.14. Nitrogen cycle
Measuring techniques of Earth and Continental drift
Plate motions are best measured by satellite-based methods. A number
of techniques are used to measure the size of Earth and continental
drifts. One of these methods is using Global Positioning System
(GPS).
GPS is a network of satellite and receiving devices used to determine
the location of something on Earth. If you could have two such
receiving devices, at two different points on Earth for example the
two ends of continental drift, you can easily determine the distance
between them using GPS.
Another device used for measuring size of Earth and continental drifts
is known as Laser ranging (laser radar).  It is an optical sensing
technology
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
I. Choose the best answer from the given alternatives.
1. All living things on earth are part of the_______________.
A. Biosphere               C. Geosphere
B. Hydrosphere           D. Cryosphere
2. The Geosphere is
A. all liquid water on Earth.    C.  100km thick layer of gases.
B. frozen water on earth.         D. Earth’s entire solid body.
3. Fresh water is important for life on Earth because:
A. without fresh water sources people will get sick and die.
B. Plants need water to grow.
C. the biosphere needs water.
D. All of the above.
4. This photo is mainly showing an example of the:
5. An example of a connection between Atmosphere and
Hydrosphere is:
A.  rivers       B.  rain           C. lakes        D. rocks
A.  Hydrosphere
B.  Geosphere
C.  Atmosphere
D.  Biosphere
Key Terms of a Unit
- Earth science    - Atmosphere       - Geosphere  - Biosphere
- Earth        - Troposphere      - lithosphere       - Hydrosphere
- Inner core        - Stratosphere      - revolution  - Core
- Geologists        - Mesosphere       - rotation
- AU  - Meridian
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Unit Summary
• Earth is the only planet in the universe to support life. It is about
150 million kilometers far from the sun. This distance, called
an astronomical unit (AU), is a standard unit of measurement in
astronomy.
• Earth is an oblate spheroid. This means it is spherical in shape,
but not perfectly round. The geoid describes the model shape
of Earth, and is used to calculate precise surface locations.
• The equatorial circumference of the Earth is 40,075 km. This
is the distance around the equator of the Earth. If you measure
the circumference of the Earth, while passing through the poles,
the distance is only 40,008 km. This is because the Earth is not a
perfect sphere. It’s rotating rapidly, which causes the equator to
bulge out.
• The equatorial diameter of the Earth is 12,756 km. This is the
diameter of the Earth measured from one side of the Earth, passing
through the center. If you go from pole to pole through the center,
the distance is only 12,714 km.
• The 4 components of the Earth subsystems are called "spheres."
Specifically, they are the "lithosphere" (land), "hydrosphere"
(water), "biosphere" (living things), and "atmosphere" (air).
• Earth's interior is divided into three major layers: the crust,
the mantle, and the core. Each layer has a unique chemical
composition, physical state, and can impact life on Earth's surface.
• Rotation and Revolution are two motions of the earth. When earth
spins or rotates around its axis, that movement of spinning is
called Rotation of Earth.  Besides, when Earth spins or revolves
around the sun, that movement is called Revolution of Earth.
• The motions of the earth have its own effects. These are: the main
effects of the Earth's rotation are a diurnal cycle of light and
darkness,
- Lunar eclipses       - Exosphere         - Crust
- Oblate spheroid    - Thermosphere   - Mantle
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
i.e. day and night, rise and fall of the sea level twice a day, sunrise
in the east and sunset in the west. Effects of Earth’s revolution
include change of the seasons and variation in the length of days and
nights.
I.  Write True if the statement is Correct and False if the state-
ment if incorrect.
1.  Atmosphere is the thin layer of gases held on the earth by
gravitation attraction.
2.  Earth rotates around the sun.
3.  Day and night are the results of Earth’s rotation.
4.  We live on the core of the Earth.
II.  Match the following earth spheres with their related meaning
Column  ‘A’                            Column  ‘B’
1. Lithosphere                       A. all of Earth's water
2. Hydrosphere                     B. all living things
3. Atmosphere                      C. all of the rocks and "hard
parts" of the Earth
4. Biosphere                         D. the blanket of gases
surrounding the planet
III. Fill the blank space
Use these words to fill in the blanks next to the sentences below.
365.25 days          Revolution               24 hours
Season                         Rotation                        Axis
Words
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
1.______________is the amount of time for Earth to make a
complete rotation.
2._____________is the process of Earth spinning on its axis.
3.____________ is the amount of time it takes Earth to completely
orbit the sun.
4.____________is the process of Earth orbiting the sun.
5.____________is an imaginary line that runs through the center of
Earth from the North Pole to the South Pole.
6. ____________is term used to describe a certain time of year.
IV . Choose the best answer from the given alternatives
1. Which of the following is an example of Biosphere connecting
to Atmosphere?
A. plants produce oxygen                C. animals live in caves
B. animals eat plants                        D. animals drink water
2. What is Earth’s outermost system?
A. Atmosphere                                  C.  Cryosphere
B. Hydrosphere                                 D. Geosphere
3. The earth’s four systems are:
A. independent from one another    C. all part of the atmosphere
B. all connected                                D. not important for life on earth
4. Photosynthesis is an example of an interaction between the
biosphere end the:
A.  Atmosphere                                C.  Cryoshpere
B. Geosphere                                   D. hydrosphere
5. What is Earth’s largest system?
A. Biosphere            C .  Hydrosphere
B. Geosphere           D. Atmosphere
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
6. The Earth is slightly flattened from a perfect spherical shape
because of
A. its rotation                        C. the pull of the sun and moon
B. storms on the sun’s surface.      D. its molten core
7. As altitude within the troposphere increases, the amount of
water vapor generally
A. decreases, only                C. remains the same
B. increases, only                 D. decreases, then increases
8. Oxygen is the most abundant element by volume in Earth’s
A. Hydrosphere     C. mantle
B. crust                  D. inner core
9. An observer watching a sailing ship at sea notes that the ship
appears to be “sinking” as it moves away. Which statement
best explains this observation?
A. The Earth is revolving.
B. The Earth is rotating.
C. The Earth has a curved surface.
D. The surface of the ocean has depressions.
10. Which one of the following Nitrogen cycle Not completed
by bacteria?
A. Nitrogen fixation            B. Nitrification
C. Assimilation                   D. Ammonification
11. What is the approximate elevation of the stratopause?
A. 10 km         B. 80 km          C. 30 km           D. 50 km
12. The best evidence that the Earth has a spherical shape is
provided by
A. photographs of the Earth taken from space satellites.
B. the amount of daylight received at the North Pole on
June 21.
C. the changing orbital speed of the Earth in its orbit around
the Sun.
D. the cyclic change of seasons.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
13. One of the following is Not the stapes of water cycle?
A. evaporation       C. de-nitrification
B. precipitation      D. transpiration.
V . Short  answer question
1. Write the Earth’s atmosphere from lowest to highest in
altitude.
2. Name and explain the three layers of Earth?
3. What are the two movements of the Earth?
4. What are effects of the Earth's rotation?
5. What is the role of the carbon cycle?
6. What are the effects of revolution of Earth?
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Unit 7   MOTION, FORCE, ENERGY AND ENERGY
At the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• describe the term motion;
•  identify types of motion (motion on straight line, circular  motion,
rotary motion and curvilinear motion);
• show those types of motion in the class;
• explain the term force;
• demonstrate the pulling/pushing activity of force;
• explain gravitational force;
• List all effects of force;
• demonstrate some effects of force;
• relate effects of force with their daily life experience;
• name measuring device of force;
• identify different measuring scales on measuring device of force;
• explain parts of measuring device of force;
• define energy as a property of matter that can be converted;
• list all forms of energy;
• explain which energy converted to other forms of energy;
• list sources of energy;
• distinguish between renewable and non-renewable forms of
energy;
• describe how energy is used wisely;
• list the strategies of conservation of energy;
• explain resource depletion and environmental degradation.
RESOURCES
Learning Outcome
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Contents
Section                                         Learning competencies
7.1 Definition and types of motion
7.2 Definition of force and
gravitational force
7.3 Effects of force
7.4 Measuring forces
7.5 Definition of Energy
(Property of matter can be converted)
7.6 Forms and Conversion of Energy
7.7 Energy Sources (sun, fuel,
hydroelectric, wind, nuclear)
7.8 Wise use & Conservation
7.9 Resource depletion &
environmental degradation
•  Define motion as the change of position
with time.
•  Describe the types of motion.
•  Give examples for each type of  motion
•  Explain the term force.
•  Demonstrate the pulling/pushing
activity of force.
•  Explain gravitational force.
•  List all effects of force
•  Demonstrate some effects of force.
•  Relate effects of force with their
daily life experience
•  Name measuring device of force
•  Identify different measuring scales
on measuring device of force
•  Explain parts of measuring device
of force
•  Define energy as a property of matter
that can be converted
•  List all forms of energy
•  Explain which energy converted
to other forms of energy.
•  List sources of energy.
•  Distinguish between renewable
and non-renewable forms of energy.
•  Describe how energy is used wisely.
•  ist the strategies of conservation
of energy
•  Explain resource depletion and
environmental degradation
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
7.1.			Definition	and	types	of	Motion
At the end of this section you will be able to:
•  define motion as the change of position with time;
•  describe the types of motion;
•  give examples for each type of motion.
In this unit, you will be introduced to the basic concepts of motion,
force, energy, forms and conservation of energy, wise use and
conservation of energy, resource depletion and environmental
degradation.
7.1.1.		Definition	of	Motion
When you go to your school, your journey begins from home. Your
home is your original position and your school is your final position.
While you are going from home to school, you are increasing the
gap between your present position and your home.
This continuous change of position is known as a motion. Notice
that your change of position is observed by considering the distance
from your school to home. Your home is taken as a reference frame.
Form a group and perform the following task; present your finding
to the class.
1. Define motion by your own word and give examples.
2. When you move  in bus,  describe are you at rest or in motion
with respect to
i. the bus seat
ii.the ground
Now let us understand motion clearly with the help of a few
Examples:
•  Our daily activities, like walking, running, closing the door, etc.
involve motion. There is a change of position of the object
involved in these activities.
•  When an airplane travels from Addis Ababa to Dire Dawa is an
example of motion.
Introduction
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Form a group and perform the following tasks
i.   Observe the motions indicated in Fig 7.1.
ii. Have you noticed any difference between the motions in Fig
7.1 (a-e)? Describe them.
iii.  Group these motions based on their path.
• The automobiles that carry passengers from one place to another
possess motion. In this case, the position of passengers is changed
from one place to another.
a. Wrists watch.
C. Roundabout  d. Simple pendulum e. Motion of kids swing
b.  A car moving on a straight line
Figure	7.1	different	types	of	motion
In Fig 7.1 (a) you observe that the motion of second or minute hand
of a wrist watch about an axis.  In Fig 7.1 (b) you observe that a car
is moving on a straight road. Its path is a straight line. Fig 7.1(c)
shows that the path of the moving car is a curved line. While Fig 7.1
(c and e) show the 'to and fro' motions of an object.
According to the nature of the movement. or based on the path followed,
motion is classified into four types as follows:
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
1.  Rectilinear Motion         3.  Oscillatory Motion
2.  Curvilinear Motion        4.  Rotary Motion
1. Rectilinear Motion: Motion in a straight line is called rectilinear
motion. In other words, when an object moves along a straight line
path, it is called rectilinear motion.
Example:
•  A boy walking on astraight road.
•  A car moving in a straight road.
•  A falling ball from a certain height.
• A boy pulling a toy towards him. etc.
2. Curvilinear motion
The motion of a particle or object moving along a curved path is called
curvilinear motion.
Examples:  Motion of a car around a circular path,
•  The motion of a ball thrown horizontally from a certain height.
• The motion of the moon around the earth.
•  Motion of a basketball into the basket, etc.
Figure 7.2 a boy and girl
walking on a straight road
Figure 7.3 Curvilinear Motion of
a basketball into the basket
Note: Circular motion is a special case of curvilinear motion, in
which the body moves along a circular path.
Examples of circular motion are:
• A bicycle or a car  moving on a circular track of park.
• The motion of the moon around the earth etc.
3.  Rotary Motion:
A type of circular motion where an object spins on its own axis,
it is called rotational motion.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Example:
•   rolling ball,
•   Spinning top and
•  the motion of the second or minute hand of a wrist watches
• Movement of the earth on its axis.
4. Oscillatory Motion
A repeating motion in which an object continuously repeats in
the same motion again and again is called Oscillatory Motion.
It is also a to and fro, back and forth or up and down motion.
Some of the common examples of oscillatory motion are:
•    A swinging swing
•    The motion of a pendulum
•    A boat tossing up and down on a river
Figure 7.4 rotating wooden
spinning top
Figure 7.5 motion of a
pendulum
I.  Choose the best answer from the given alternatives.
1. Which of the following is a type of motion?
A. rectilinear motion         B.  rotary motion
C. oscillatory motion         D. all of these
2. Which motion type describes the motion of pendulum of a
clock?
A.  linear motion                             C. rotary motion
B,  oscillatory motion                     D. all of these
3.  The spinning of the body about its axis is_____
A.  rotatory            C. translational
B.  circular             D. vibratory
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Form a group and perform the following activities Share your
opinion to the whole class.
i.   What is a force?
ii.   Mention some examples of forces from your daily activities.
iii.  Explain the following actions.
- A push you exert on a wall,
- A pull exerted to drag a box on a table.
7.2.		Definition	of	Force	and	Gravitational	Force
4. Which type of motion is “the pendulum of a wall clock moves
at regular intervals”?
A.  Rectilinear           C. Rotatory
B.  Vibratory             D.  B and C
5. Which type of motion is “a train moving on a straight track “?
A.   Circular                    C. Rotary
B.   Rectilinear                D. none of the above
6. The act, process or state of the change in place or position of a
body with respect to time and relative to the observer is said to
be__________________.
A.   Rest                     C. Motion
B.   Stationary            D. none of the above
II. Short answer questions
1. What is a motion?
2. State at least four types of motion, and give practical examples
for each type
Definitions	of	force
At the end of this section you will be able to:
•   explain the term force;
•   demonstrate the pulling/pushing activity of force;
•   explain gravitational force.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
All of us are familiar with the word force as we use it in our everyday
life. Let us use to describe interactions between different bodies in
nature.
For example when you kick a ball, tear a paper, bend a wire, hold
a bag, walk on the floor, close and open a door, you apply a force.
A force is a push or pull upon an object resulting from the object's
interaction with another object. Whenever there is an interaction
between two objects, there is a force upon each of the objects.
Forces influence objects that are at rest or that are already in motion. It
can also be defined as an external agent which can change the state of rest
or motion of a body.
Figure 7.6(a) When a horse pulling a cart.      Figure 7.6(b) When a wagon pushed.
Forces  are classified into two broad categories . These are
(i). Contact forces and
(ii). Non-contact forces
i. Contact forces are forces exerted when two objects are in touch or
contact.
For example; Spring force, frictional force, collision force  etc
ii. Non-contact forces are forces exerted without body contact. They
are forces acting at a distance. Gravitational force, magnetic force and
electrical forces.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
We live on Earth. It is difficult to get away from earth. If you
jump   upwards, you fall back down again. The earth’s gravity pulls
you down wards. The earth’s gravity causes a force that pulls any
object down wards. This force is called weight (gravitational force).
Gravity always pulls you towards the center of the Earth. It
doesn’t matter where you are on the surface of the earth. Since, a
freely    falling body in the air moves down irrespective of its mass.
This is due to force of gravity. Example:
•  Falling of fruits from trees due to Earth’s gravitational pull
•  The Earth’s gravitational pull keeps  us all stationary; otherwise,
we all would be flying now.
•  Revolution of the Earth around the Sun.
•   Revolution of the moon around the Earth.
Figure 7.7.  Our weight is caused by the pull of the earth's gravity
Gravitational force
ACTIVITY7.4
Form a group and discuss the following ideas.  Present your dis-
cussion to the class.
Throw a ball vertically upward and observe its motion. What will
happen to the ball? Will it continue to move upward ?
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Sir Isaac Newton was an English mathematician and physicist who
lived from 1642-1727.   The legend is that Newton discovered Gravity
when he saw a falling apple while thinking about the forces of nature.
Whatever really happened, Newton realized that some force must be
acting on falling objects like apples because otherwise they would
not start moving from rest. Newton called this force "gravity" and
determined that gravitational forces exist between all objects.
Note
• Force is a push or pull of an object.
• Gravity is attractive force between objects with mass.
• Gravity always a pull never a push.
• Gravitational force is the force of attraction among all masses in
the universe; especially the attraction of the earth's mass for bodies
near its surface.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
I.  Fill in the blank spaces with the appropriate word(s).
1._________is the force of attraction that acts between all objects in
the universe, without exception.
2.  Push or pull of an object in a certain direction is known _____.
II.  Choose the best answer from the givenalternatives.
1. The force of gravity on a person or object at the surface of a   planet
is called
A. Mass               B.  Gravity          C.  weight         D.  motion
2.   The force that pulls objects toward Earth is called ______.
A.   mass               B. gravity             C.  air              D. wind
3.   Which one of the following best describes a gravitational force?
A.   A repulsive force between any two objects with mass.
B. A force of attraction between two objects with mass.
C. A force between any two objects, whether or not they have
mass.
D. All of the above.
III short answer questions
1.  Define the term Force as a science with appropriate examples
from your daily life.
2.   Explain gravitational force.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Observe the activities shown in Figure 7.8
a.   Explain the effects of forces in each activity.
b.   List and show other effects of force in the class in front of the
students.
Figure 7. 8.  Different effects of forces
a, When force is applied on flour dough,
it changes its shap
c, The soccer kicks ball
d, A goal keeper changes the direction
of motion of a ball
b, The force of brakes can stop a
moving car
7.3.		Effects	of	Force
At the end of this section you will be able to:
• list all effects of force;
• demonstrate some effects of force;
• relate effects of force with their daily life experience.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure 7.9 . Some Effect of force on daily activities
Force	has	the	following	main	effects,	when	it	is	exerted	on	an
object:
• A force can move a stationary object
Example:  when a force is applied to a stationary tennis ball,
it will make the ball continue its motion in the direction of
the applied force.
• A force can change the speed of a moving object.
Example:  When we keep on pedaling the pedal of the bicycle,
the speed of the bicycle increases. And when we apply the
brake, the speed of the bicycle decreases.
• A force can either stop or slow down the moving object.
Example: The force of brakes can stop a moving car.
• A force can change the direction of a moving object.
Example: the direction of the moving football can be changed
by applying force at an angle.
• A force can change the shape of an object.
Example: When force is applied on flour dough, it changes
itsshape shape.
How	effect	of	force	is	related	with	the	daily	life?
We are very familiar with the various effects of force in our everyday
life. Like, we walk, we run, we play, and we sit, and we stand. In all
of these activities, we have all seen the changing of the motion of the
state.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
• Pushing a wheel barrow.
• Opening or closing a door.
• Squeezing wet clothes.
• Gravitational force.
• Brakes applied to stop a moving vehicle.
• A football kicked
• Rubbing a glass rod with a silk.
• Running and Pushing etc.
I.  Choose the best answer from the given alternatives.
1.  Which one of  the following is the effects of force, when it is
exerted on an object?
A.  Change the speed of a moving object.
B.  Move a stationary object.
C.  Change the shape of an object.
D.  All of the above.
2.  If two forces from opposite direction are applied on an object
and the object is malleable, it will_________________.
A.  Change in color                  C. Change in direction
B.  Change in motion               D.  Change in shape
3. To squeeze toothpaste or press a lift button we apply_______.
A.  heat                                     C. force
B.  signal                                  D. stationary
4. A force can act on a stationary object and can cause it to____.
A.  Move                                   C. develop
B.  Grow                                   D. stationary
II.  short answer questions
1. List and describe some effects of a force.
Some additional examples are:
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Discuss the following activity in your group and present your
discussion to the class.
1.   What is the instrument used to measure a force?
2.   Explain parts of measuring device of force.
3.   Can we use spring balance to measure mass when a shopkeeper
measure banana, orange or others?
7.4.  Measuring Forces
At the end of this section you will be able to:
•  name measuring device of force;
•  identify different measuring scales on measuring device of force ;
• explain parts of measuring device of force.
In science, if we want to know that one force is bigger than another
we do not simply guess; we make measurements. How can we mea
sure forces?
To measure the amount of force exerted on an object we use an instrument
called Newton meter (force meter) also called spring balance. But
Newton meter is the scientific instrument used to measure a force.
Parts of Spring balance
• Spring balance: Scale made up of a hook attached to a spring that
stretches in proportion to the weight of the object being weighed.
• Hook: Curved part on which the body to be weighed is hung.
• Graduated scale: The divisions of equal length that are marked
on the spring balance and constitute the units of measurement.
•  Pointer: Pointer connected to the spring that moves along a
graduated scale to indicate the weight of the body being weighed
Figure 7.10.  Spring balance
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure 7.11 shows how to measure the force needed to pull a block
of wood along the bench. The following steps  are used in measuring
a force.
• Check that the force meter reads zero before you start.
• Attach the hook of the force meter to the block.
• Hold the ring at the other end of the force meter and pull the
block.
• Read the value of the force from the scale
The spring stretches when a force is applied to the hook. The bigger
the force applied, the longer the spring stretches and the bigger the
reading.
Figure 7.11  Measuring pull of force
I. Fill in the blank spaces with the appropriate word(s).
1.  A force is measured using an instrument called _______.
2. ________is a curved part of force meter on which the body to be
weighed is hung.
3. The diagram shows parts of newton meter; Name the parts of the
arrow that are represented by letter.
a.    _____________
b.    _____________
c.    _____________
d.    _____________
e.    _____________
f.    _____________
de
c
b
a
f
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
7.5.		Definition	of	Energy	(Property	of	matter	can	be	converted)
At the end of this section you will be able to:
•   define energy as a property of matter that can be converted.
By using internet or other reference materials perform the follow-
ing tasks in group and present your findings to the class.
i.  Define energy as a property of matter.
ii. Explain with examples how energy and matter are related.
In unit two of this book, you learned important concepts about matter.
In this section, you will learn the concepts of energy. Matter is any
thing that have mass and occupies space..
Energy is a very common word frequently used in our day-to-day life.
Energy is the property of matter, and it comes in many forms, such as
heat, sound, light, and motion.  It can be transferred between objects,
and converted in form. It cannot be created or destroyed.
Examples of energy and matter
•  A raindrop falling from the sky is made of matter (water), and it
has potential, kinetic, and thermal energy.
•  A light bulb is made of matter, and it emits energy in the form of
heat and light.
•  The wind consists of matter (gases in air, dust, pollen), and it has
kinetic and thermal energy.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Discuss the following questions in a group and present your opinion
to the whole class.
i.   List the different forms of energy.
ii.  Define conversion of energy and give examples which energy is
converted to other forms of energy.
7.6.  Forms and Conversion of Energy
I. Fill in the blank spaces with the appropriate word(s).
1.__________ is the property of mater, and it comes in many forms.
2.____________is any thing that have mass and occupy space.
3. Alit light bulb is made of matter, plus it emits energy in the form
__________ and ___________
At the end of this section you will be able to:
•  list all forms of energy;
•  explain which energy converted to other forms of energy.
Forms of energy
The world we live in provides us with many different forms of energy.
Examples of these are: light energy, heat energy, mechanical energy,
gravitational energy, kinetic energy, potential energy, thermal energy,
and electrical energy, sound energy, chemical energy, nuclear or atomic
energy, elastic potential energy and so on. We can think energy coming
in different forms, some for storing and some for transferring.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
The table 7.1 shows some different forms of energy and their descriptions.
Form of energy Description
Chemical energy  Energy of a chemical substance.
Elastic energy Energy of a stretched or squashed object
Electrical energy  Energy carried by electricity
Gravitational potential energy Energy of an object that has been lifted
Heat energy Energy spreading  out from a hot object
Kinetic energy Energy of a moving object
Light energy Energy spreading out from a bright object
Thermal energy  Energy of a hot object
Sound energy  Energy coming from a vibrating source
Energy conversions
Energy can be changed from one form to another. The process of changing energy from one
form to another form is called energy conversion. A very common energy conversion is a
change from gravitational potential energy to kinetic energy. This occurs whenever an
object falls due to the force of gravity. Each form can be converted or changed into the
other forms.  The notion of energy is that energy is changed from one form into different
forms using transducers. Transducer is a device used to transform energy from one form to
another. For example:
1. Battery converts chemical energy into electrical energy.
2. A generator converts mechanical energy into electrical energy.
3. A motor converts electrical energy into mechanical energy.
The Table7.2 Summarizing Energy Conversion from one form to another
Original energy Transducer Energy transformed
Chemical energy Battery Electrical energy
Chemical energy                       Motor Chemical energy
Energy conversions
Energy can be changed from one form to another. The process of
changing energy from one form to another form is called energy
conversion. A very common energy conversion is a change from
gravitational potential energy to kinetic energy. This occurs
whenever an object falls due to the force of gravity. Each form can
be converted or changed into the other forms.  The notion of energy
is that energy is changed from one form into different forms using
transducers. Transducer is a device used to transform energy from
one form to another.
For example:
1. Battery converts chemical energy into electrical energy.
2. A generator converts mechanical energy into electrical energy.
3. A motor converts electrical energy into mechanical energy.
Form of energy                          Description
Chemical energy                          Energy of a chemical substance.
Elastic energy                                     Energy of a stretched or squashed object
Electrical energy                          Energy carried by electricity
Gravitational potential energy             Energy of an object that has been lifted
Heat energy                                     Energy spreading  out from a hot object
Kinetic energy                                     Energy of a moving object
Light energy                                     Energy spreading out from a bright object
Sound energy                                      Energy coming from a vibrating source
The table 7.1 shows some different forms of energy and their descriptions.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
i. Choose the best answer from the following alternatives
1. One of the following is not a form of energy?
A. Light      B. sound        C. Kinetic         D. weight
2. The process of changing energy from one form to another form is called
A. energy conversion             C. energy depilation
B. energy conservation           D. energy degradation
3. Which One of the following is a form of energy?
A. Chemical      B. Solar         C. Electrical      D. all of the these
ii. Complete the table
1. Energy can be transferred in different ways. Copy the table and
use words from the list to complete the first column.
Chemical energy,   Electrical energy,  Mechanical energy
Original energy       Transducer          Energy transformed
Microphone        Sound energy
Generator           Electrical energy
Battery          Electrical energy
Mechanical energy Generator Electrical energy
Solar energy Solar panel Electrical energy
Chemical energy Motor car Mechanical energy
Electrical energy Microphone Sound energy
Electrical energy Heater Heat energy
Figure 7.12 energy conversion
i. Choose the best answer from the following alternatives
1. One of the following is not form of energy?
A. Light      B. sound        C. Kinetic         D. weight
2. The process of changing energy from one form to another form is called
A. energy conversion             C. energy depilation
B. energy conservation           D. energy degradation
3. Which One of the following is a form of energy?
A. Chemical      B. Solar         C. Electrical      D. all of the these
ii. complete the table
1. Energy can be transferred in different ways. Copy the table and use words from
the list to complete the first column.
Chemical energy,   Electrical energy,  Mechanical energy
Original energy Transducer Energy transformed
Microphone Sound energy
Generator Electrical energy
Battery Electrical energy
The table 7.1 shows some different forms of energy and their descriptions.
Form of energy Description
Chemical energy  Energy of a chemical substance.
Elastic energy Energy of a stretched or squashed object
Electrical energy  Energy carried by electricity
Gravitational potential energy Energy of an object that has been lifted
Heat energy Energy spreading  out from a hot object
Kinetic energy Energy of a moving object
Light energy Energy spreading out from a bright object
Thermal energy  Energy of a hot object
Sound energy  Energy coming from a vibrating source
Energy conversions
Energy can be changed from one form to another. The process of changing energy from one
form to another form is called energy conversion. A very common energy conversion is a
change from gravitational potential energy to kinetic energy. This occurs whenever an
object falls due to the force of gravity. Each form can be converted or changed into the
other forms.  The notion of energy is that energy is changed from one form into different
forms using transducers. Transducer is a device used to transform energy from one form to
another. For example:
1. Battery converts chemical energy into electrical energy.
2. A generator converts mechanical energy into electrical energy.
3. A motor converts electrical energy into mechanical energy.
The Table7.2 Summarizing Energy Conversion from one form to another
Original energy Transducer Energy transformed
Chemical energy Battery Electrical energy
Chemical energy                       Motor Chemical energy
Original energy Transducer Energy transformed
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
7.7.  Energy Source (sun, fuel, hydroelectric, wind, nuclear)
At the end of this section you will be able to:
•  list sources of energy;
•  distinguish between renewable and non-renewable forms of
energy.
In simple terms we can say that anything out of which usable energy
can be extracted is a source of energy. There is a variety of sources
that provide us energy for different purposes. Some of them are coal,
petrol, diesel, kerosene, natural gas, hydroelectric power, wind
mills, solar panels, and biomass etc.
The energy sources can be replenished in a short period of time are
referred to as “renewable” energy sources, whereas the energy sources
that we are using up and cannot be generated in a short period of
time are called non-renewable energy sources. Thus, all the sources
of energy can be divided into two categories: renewable
sources and non-renewable sources of energy.
Discuss the following
activities within a
group and present your
discussion to the class.
1.  List out any five
activities from your
daily life in which
different forms of
energy are involved.
2. Differentiate between
renewable and
non-renewable
sources of energy.Figure 7.12 Source of energy
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Renewable resources include sunlight,
water, wind and also geothermal sources
such as hot springs and fumaroles
Renewable resources cannot be depleted        Non-renewable resources deplete
over time                                                          over time
Depletion
Most renewable resources have low
carbon emissions and low carbon
footprint
Non-renewable energy has a
comparatively higher carbon
footprint and carbon
Non-renewable energy includes
fossil fuels such as coal
and petroleum.
Enviromental Impact
Renewable Resources                            Non-renewable Resources
Table 7.3 major differences between renewable and non-renewable resources
Renewable energy sources: - are the energy sources, which can be
turned into use again after being used.  It comes from natural sources
and continually regenerates themselves, which makes them nearly
inexhaustible. These energy sources are plentiful, sustainable, naturally
replenished and good to the environment.
The major types or sources of renewable energy are:
- Solar energy from the sun
- Wind energy
- Geothermal energy from the heat inside the earth
- Hydropower from flowing water
- Biomass from plants
- Ocean energy in the form of wave, tidal, current energy and
ocean thermal energy.
Non- renewable sources:  are the energy sources, which cannot be
turned into use again. It is a finite resource. It is a natural substance
that is not replenished with the speed at which it is consumed. These
are formed over thousands of years from the buried remains of ancient
sea plants and animals that lived millions of years ago. Most of these
energy sources are “dirty” fossil fuels, which are generally dingier
for the environment.The major types or sources of non-renewable
energy are: petroleum, natural gas, coal, nuclear energy and
hydrocarbon gas liquids
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
I.  Choose the best answer from the given alternatives
1.  Which of the following is a nonrenewable energy resource?
A. Solar               B. hydroelectric          C. wind              D. coal
2.  What type of energy is derived from heated groundwater?
A.  solar energy                       C. geothermal energy
B.  hydroelectric energy          D. nuclear energy
3.  Which of the following is a renewable energy resource?
A. Solar           B. Biomass          C. Geothermal       D. All
II.  Short answer questions
1.  List sources of energy.
2.What is the difference between renewable and non-renewable forms
of energy and give four examples for each.
Non-renewable energy has a
comparatively lower upfront
cost.
Cost
The upfront cost of renewable energy
is high. – For instance, Generating
electricity using technologies running
on hydro power is costlier than gen-
erating it with fossil fuels
Renewable and non-renewable resources have many similarities They
both are resources and they both have to do with the environment,
they both grow on Earth, as well. Thus, we must use them wisely.
7.8.  Wise use and Conservation of Energy
At the end of this section you will be able to:
•  describe how energy is used wisely;
•  list the strategies of conservation of energy.
Energy conservation
The key for resolving the country’s energy crisis lies on us with cit -
izens. Among things we can do is the conservation of our energy
sources. It is said that energy saved is as good as energy generated.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Therefore, we should not only judiciously use energy sources but save
energy as much as we can. You can start conservation of energy from
your home.
Energy conservation is the practice of using less energy in order to
lower costs and reduce environmental impact. energy can be
conserved by
•  Reducing wastage and losses,
•  Improving efficiency through technological upgrades and
•  Improved operation and maintenance
the good rule to follow for conservation of energy use the following
three (3) R’s:
• Reduce: Reduce the amount of trash you produce and the  amount
of energy that are consumed. This is the best way to conserve natural
resources and reduce pollution.
• Reuse: By products that you can use more than once. Try to avoid
disposable items that use up natural resources and produce extra
trash.
• Recycle: Recycling is the process that reuses and changes used
materials into things that can be of use. Although it requires energy
to recycle things, overall, recycling saves energy as well as landfill
space and reduces our need for more natural resources. Lots
of things can be recycled, Like plastic, metal, glass, paper, and
By referring internet or other reference materials explain how
energy is used wisely and list the strategies of conservation of energy.
Present your finding to the class.
Strategies of conservation of energy
The steps that you can and should take for saving energy at home or
in the office are:
- Switch off lights, fans and other appliances when not in use.
- Water taps should not be left open.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Perform the following tasks in groups and present your conclusion
to the class.
i.  Explain resource depletion and environmental degradation
ii. Explain causes and effects of resource depletion and environmental
degradation
Resource depletion
Resource depletion is the exhaustion of raw materials within a region.
Resources are commonly divided between renewable resources and
non-renewable resources. Use of either of these forms of resources
beyond their rate of replacement is considered to be resource
depletion. There are different types of resource depletion. These are
deforestation, mining,  aquifer depletion, contamination of resources,
slash-and-burn agriculture and overconsumption.
7.9.   Resource Depletion and Environmental Degradation
-  While cooking vegetables the vessel should remain covered.
-   For cooking, only the required quantity of water should be used.
-   Soak pulses in water for some time before cooking,
-   Use more efficient appliances.
-   Use public transport in place of your own vehicle to save fuel.
-   Share automobiles rides to office, instead of driving alone to office.
Give short answers.
1. What is conservation of energy?
2. Explain how energy is used wisely.
3. List Strategies of conservation of energy
At the end of this section you will be able to:
• explain resource depletion and environmental degradation.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Environmental Degradation
The environmental degradation is the deterioration of the environment
through depletion of resources. It includes all the biotic and abiotic
element that form our surrounding that is air, water, soil, pant animals,
and all other living and non-living element of the earth. The major
factors of environmental degradation are:
•   human: (modern urbanization, industrialization, overpopulation
growth, deforestation, etc.);
•  natural: (flood, typhoons, droughts, rising temperatures, fires, etc.
• Causes environmental pollution refers to the degradation of the
quality and  quantity of natural resources.
The	major	Effects	of	Environmental	Degradation	are: impact on
human health, poverty, atmospheric changes, loss of  biodiversity and
scarcity of natural resources.
Causes for
Resource Depletion
Effects	of	resource
depletion
Solutions to the
Resource  Depletion
Problem
• Waste
• Farming
• Overpopulation
• Mining
• Erosion
• Pollution
• Deforestation
• Industrialization
• Water shortages
• Oil shortages
• Economic effects
• Health effects
• Air pollution
• Loss of forests
• Global warming
• Extinction of ani -
mals and plants
• Avoid plastic
• Reduce waste
• Stop deforestation
• Reduction in
consumption
• Save electricity
• Recycle and reuse
• Education
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Figure7.14  Different causes of environmental degradation.
Key terms
-  Motion   - Rectilinear motion    -Transducer     -Oscillatory motion
-  Curvilinear   -environmental     -Energy           -Resource depletion
motion          degradation
-  Force     - Gravity              - matter      - Gravitational force
- Weight    - Newton meter    - conservation   - Spring balance
of energy
- Graduated     - Renewable         - Non-renewable  - Rotary motion
scale      energy                energy
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
SUMMARY
In this unit you learnt that:
• Motion is a continuous change of position relative to a reference
point. There are four types of motions. They are rectilinear, curvi
linear, rotary and vibrational motion.
• A force is a push or pull upon an object resulting from the object's
interaction with another object.
• Gravitational force is the force that is exerted by the Earth on ev -
ery object, which is near or on its surface.
• Force acting on an object causes the object to change its shape or
size, to start moving a stationary object, to stop a moving object,
to speed up or to slow down a moving object.
• You can use a device called a force meter to measure the size of a
force. It contains a spring connected to a metal hook. The spring
stretches when a force is applied to the hook. The bigger the force
applied, the longer the spring stretches and the bigger the reading.
The unit of force is called the newton, and it has the symbol N.
• Energy is the property of mater, and it comes in many forms, such
as heat, sound, light, and motion.  It can be transferred between
objects, and converted in form.
• Energy exists in different forms. Examples of these are: light
energy, heat energy, mechanical energy, gravitational energy,
electrical energy, sound energy, chemical energy, nuclear or atomic
energy and so on. Each form can be converted or changed into the
other forms.
• Sources of energy can be classified into: Renewable Sources and
Non-renewable Sources.
• A renewable source is the natural resources that can be naturally
replenished and are safe to the environment . Example: Solar
energy, geothermal energy, Wind energy, biomass, Hydropower
and tidal energy.
• Non-renewable sources of energy cause impact on nature and are
a limited supply source. Non-renewable sources can be extracted
from the earth, and will run out as time passes. Example: Natural
gas, coal, petroleum, and Nuclear energy .
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
• Using energy more wisely can reduce air pollution and result in
cleaner air. The power plants that supply energy release harmful
greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.
• Resource depletion is the exhaustion of raw materials within a region .
The depletion of natural resources is a big problem. It has several
adverse effects on  humanity as well as on the whole environmental
system.
• Environmental degradation is the deterioration of the environment
through depletion of resources such as quality of air, water and soil;
the destruction of ecosystems; habitat destruction; the extinction
of wildlife; and pollution.
part I : Write True if the statement is correct and false  if it is
incorrect.
1.  Energy can be created.
2.  Geothermal energy is renewable
3.  A force that acts an object falling from a tall building is called
gravitational force.
4.  A push or a pull of an object  in a certain direction is known as motion.
Part II:   Complete the following sentences by choosing
alternatives	from	the	bracket	and	fill	in	the	blank	space.
Coal, natural gas and oil are all examples of _____ (renewable/non-re-
newable) energy resources. When they are burned, they release _____
(energy/electricity). Coal, natural gas and oil are also known as _____
(nuclear fuels/fossil fuels). Wind and solar energy are examples of
_____ (renewable/non-renewable) energy sources because they _____
(can/cannot) be replaced. _________ has to be applied to change the
__________of a ____________object. (moving, direction, force)
Part III: Choose the best answer from the given alternatives
1.  Which type of motion repeats itself at regular intervals of time?
A. Circular motion                C. Rectilinear motion
B. Vibratory motion              D. none of the above
2.   Rotation of the Earth is an example of___________.
A.  Periodic motion                      C.  Circular motion
B.  Rectilinear motion                   D.  Both A and B
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
3.  The best definition of force is                             .
A. a push or a pull of an object.    C. stored energy
B. energy in motion                      D. anything that takes up space
4.  What type of energy does an oven produce?
A. light         B. heat       C. light and heat    D. none of the above
5.  Which of the following is NOT the effect of force?
A. Deformation                      C. To start motion
B. To stop motion                   D. to change mass
6.  Which instrument is used to measure force?
A. Spring balance                   C. Beam balance
B. Newton                               D. Thermometer
7.  All of the following are examples of things that produce light
energy EXCEPT:
A. Candle        B. Compass      C. Desk Lamp    D. Flashlight
8.  Which of the following does NOT produce light energy?
A. Car               B. phone        C. picture frame       D. computer
9.  What energy do you get from eating an apple?
A. nuclear energy                           C. sound energy
B. electromagnetic energy             D. chemical energy
10. The energy source that does the least harm to the environment is
A. Renewable                                  B. Non-renewable
11. Nuclear energy is:
A. Renewable               B. Non-renewable
12. Which of the following is a source of energy?
A. Sun              B. Waves            C.  Wind               D. All
13.  Which of these are renewable energy sources?
A. Coal      B. natural gas     C. sunlight           D. None of these
14.  Which type of renewable energy uses the movement of air to
generate electricity?
A. water          B. sun            C. wind        D. Biomass
15.   Most energy sources are used to give us
A. Food and water                C.  Electricity and heat
B.  Heat and water                D. Heat and fuel
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
:
16.  Renewable energy is energy that:
A. Can be reused over and over.
B. Can be used up completely.
C. Can be changed into a new energy
D. Cannot be replaced.
17.  Non-renewable energy is the energy that
A. Can be used over and over.
B. Can be used up completely.
C. Cannot be changed into a new energy.
D. Can be replaced
18.  Resource depletion is commonly associated with
A. Water usage                          C. trees and fishing
B.  Fossil fuel consumption      D.  All
19.  Which one of the following is an examples of environmental
degradation:
A.  Deforestation.                                C. Water Pollution.
B. Depletion of the ozone layer          D. All
Part IV: Give short answer questions
1. Explain and give one example for gravitational force.
2. Why does an object thrown up wards come down after reaching a
point?
3. What is meant by weight?
4. Name the motion possessed by these objects- blades of an electric
fan in motion, a spinning top, and hands of a clock, vehicle on a
straight road, the earth around the sun and pendulum of a wall clock.
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website
Grade 7General  Science Student  Textbook
Addis Ababa / Ethiopia / 20 14 EC
Ethiofetena.com Ethiopian No 1 Educational Website